[DU1]
Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 14 November 2014
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/69/L.6)]
69/15.	SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway


	The General Assembly,
	Recalling its resolution 66/288 of 27 July 2012, in which it decided to organize, in 2014, the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States at the highest possible level, as well as its resolutions 67/207 of 21 December 2012 and 68/238 of 27 December 2013 and its decision 67/558 of 17 May 2013,
	1.	Expresses its profound gratitude to the Government and the people of Samoa for hosting the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States in Apia from 1 to 4 September 2014 and for providing all the necessary support;
	2.	Endorses the outcome document of the Conference, entitled “SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway”, which is annexed to the present resolution.

51st plenary meeting
14 November 2014


Annex
SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway

Preamble
1.	We, the Heads of State and Government and high-level representatives, having met in Apia from 1 to 4 September 2014 at the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States, with the full participation of civil society and relevant stakeholders, reaffirm our commitment to the sustainable development of small island developing States. This can be achieved only with a broad alliance of people, governments, civil society and the private sector all working together to achieve the future we want for present and future generations.
2.	We reaffirm the commitments we made at United Nations conferences and summits on sustainable development: the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,1 Agenda 21,2 the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21,3 the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation),4 including chapter VII, on the sustainable development of small island developing States, and the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development,5 the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States (Barbados Programme of Action)6 and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States (Mauritius Strategy),7 and the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”.8 We further underscore that these processes are still being implemented and that there is a need for a more integrated approach to the sustainable development of small island developing States, with the support of the international community and all stakeholders.
3.	We recall as well our commitments in the outcomes of all the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and environmental fields, including the United Nations Millennium Declaration,9 the 2005 World Summit Outcome,10 the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development,11 the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document of the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus,12 the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals,13 the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development,14 the key actions for the further implementation of the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development15 and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action.16
4.	We reaffirm that we continue to be guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, with full respect for international law and its principles.
5.	We reaffirm that small island developing States remain a special case for sustainable development in view of their unique and particular vulnerabilities and that they remain constrained in meeting their goals in all three dimensions of sustainable development. We recognize the ownership and leadership of small island developing States in overcoming some of these challenges, but stress that, in the absence of international cooperation, success will remain difficult.
6.	We recognize that poverty eradication, changing unsustainable and promoting sustainable patterns of consumption and production and protecting and managing the natural resource base of economic and social development are the overarching objectives of and essential requirements for sustainable development. We also reaffirm the need to achieve sustainable development by promoting sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth, creating greater opportunities for all, reducing inequalities, raising basic standards of living, fostering equitable social development and inclusion and promoting the integrated and sustainable management of natural resources and ecosystems that supports, inter alia, economic, social and human development while facilitating ecosystem conservation, regeneration, restoration and resilience in the face of new and emerging challenges.
7.	We reaffirm the importance of freedom, peace and security, respect for all human rights, including the right to development and the right to an adequate standard of living, including the right to food, the rule of law, gender equality, women’s empowerment, reducing inequalities and the overall commitment to just and democratic societies for development.
8.	We reaffirm the importance of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,17 as well as other international instruments relating to human rights and international law. We emphasize the responsibilities of all States, in conformity with the Charter, to respect, protect and promote human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction of any kind as to race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth, disability or other status.
9.	We reaffirm our commitment to move the sustainable development agenda forward, and in this regard we urge all parties to take concrete measures to expeditiously advance the sustainable development of small island developing States, including through the internationally agreed development goals, in order for them to eradicate poverty, build resilience and improve the quality of life. We recognize the need to implement expeditiously, through genuine and durable partnerships, the global effort in support of the sustainable development of small island developing States through concrete, focused, forward-looking and action-oriented programmes.
10.	We reaffirm all the principles of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, including the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, as set out in principle 7 thereof.
11.	We recognize that sea-level rise and other adverse impacts of climate change continue to pose a significant risk to small island developing States and their efforts to achieve sustainable development and, for many, represent the gravest of threats to their survival and viability, including, for some, through the loss of territory.
12.	With the theme of the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States being “The sustainable development of small island developing States through genuine and durable partnerships”, we recognize that international cooperation and partnerships of various kinds and across a wide variety of stakeholders are critical for the implementation of the sustainable development of small island developing States. Such partnerships should be based on the principles of national ownership, mutual trust, transparency and accountability.
13.	We acknowledge that the further implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action and the Mauritius Strategy and the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway (Samoa Pathway) in support of the sustainable development of small island developing States would require appropriate consideration in the post-2015 development agenda.
14.	We recognize that, in spite of the considerable efforts of small island developing States and the mobilization of their limited resources, their progress in the attainment of the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and in implementing the Barbados Programme of Action and the Mauritius Strategy has been uneven, and some have regressed economically. A number of significant challenges remain.
15.	We recognize that the adverse impacts of climate change compound existing challenges in small island developing States and have placed additional burdens on their national budgets and their efforts to achieve the sustainable development goals. We note the views expressed by small island developing States that the financial resources available to date have not been adequate to facilitate the implementation of climate change adaptation and mitigation projects, and we also recognize that, at times, complex application procedures have prevented some small island developing States from gaining access to funds that are available internationally. In this regard, we welcome the recent Green Climate Fund Board decision to aim for a floor of 50 per cent of the adaptation allocation for particularly vulnerable countries, including small island developing States, and we note the importance of continued support to address gaps in the capacity to gain access to and manage climate finance.
16.	We note that small island developing States consider that the level of resources has been insufficient to ensure their capacity to respond effectively to multiple crises and that, without the necessary resources, they have not fully succeeded in building capacity, strengthening national institutions according to national priorities, gaining access to and developing renewable energy and other environmentally sound technologies, creating an enabling environment for sustainable development or fully integrating the Barbados Programme of Action and the Mauritius Strategy into national plans and strategies.
17.	We underscore the need for adequate and coordinated support from the United Nations system and the importance of accessible and transparent support from the international financial institutions that take fully into account the specific needs and vulnerabilities of small island developing States for the implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action, the Mauritius Strategy and the Samoa Pathway, and we call for a renewed dedication of United Nations system support for cooperation among small island developing States and national, regional and interregional coordination.
18.	We recognize that small island developing States have made significant efforts at the national and regional levels to implement the Barbados Programme of Action and the Mauritius Strategy. They have mainstreamed sustainable development principles into national and in some cases regional development plans, policies and strategies, and undertaken political commitments to promote and raise awareness of the importance of sustainable development issues. They have also mobilized resources at the national and regional levels despite their limited resource base. Small island developing States have demonstrated strong leadership by calling for ambitious and urgent action on climate change, by protecting biodiversity, by calling for the conservation and sustainable use of oceans and seas and their resources and by adopting strategies for the promotion of renewable energy.
19.	We recognize and call for the strengthening of the long-standing cooperation and support provided by the international community in assisting small island developing States to make progress in addressing their vulnerabilities and supporting their sustainable development efforts.
20.	Mindful of the importance of ensuring that the graduation of a country from least developed country status does not disrupt the development progress which that country has achieved, we reaffirm the need for the smooth transition of small island developing States that have recently graduated, and emphasize that a successful transition needs to be based on the national smooth transition strategy elaborated as a priority by each graduating country, which can, inter alia, mitigate the possible loss of concessionary financing and reduce the risks of falling heavily into debt.
21.	While the well-being of small island developing States and their peoples depends first and foremost on national actions, we recognize that there is an urgent need to strengthen cooperation and enable strong, genuine and durable partnerships at the subnational, national, subregional, regional and international levels to enhance international cooperation and action to address the unique and particular vulnerabilities of small island developing States so as to ensure their sustainable development.
22.	We reaffirm our commitment to take urgent and concrete action to address the vulnerability of small island developing States, including through the sustained implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action and the Mauritius Strategy, and we underscore the urgency of finding additional solutions to the major challenges facing small island developing States in a concerted manner so as to support them in sustaining the momentum realized in implementing the Samoa Pathway. With renewed political will and strong leadership, we dedicate ourselves to working in meaningful partnership with all stakeholders at all levels. It is in this context that the present Samoa Pathway presents a basis for action in the agreed priority areas.

Sustained and sustainable, inclusive and equitable economic growth with decent work for all
Development models in small island developing States for the implementation of sustainable development and poverty eradication
23.	We recognize that the ability of the small island developing States to sustain high levels of economic growth and job creation has been affected by the ongoing adverse impacts of the global economic crisis, declining foreign direct investment, trade imbalances, increased indebtedness, the lack of adequate transportation, energy and information and communications technology infrastructure networks, limited human and institutional capacity and the inability to integrate effectively into the global economy. The growth prospects of the small island developing States have also been hindered by other factors, including climate change, the impact of natural disasters, the high cost of imported energy and the degradation of coastal and marine ecosystems and sea-level rise.
24.	As it is vitally important to support the efforts of small island developing States to build resilient societies and economies, we recognize that, beyond the rich ecosystems of those States, people are their greatest resource. In order to achieve sustained, inclusive and equitable growth with full and productive employment, social protection and the creation of decent work for all, small island developing States, in partnership with the international community, will seek to increase investment in the education and training of their people. Migrants and diaspora communities and organizations also play an important role in enhancing development in their communities of origin. Sound macroeconomic policies and sustainable economic management, fiscal predictability, investment and regulatory certainty, responsible borrowing and lending and debt sustainability are also critical, as is the need to address high rates of unemployment, particularly among youth, women and persons with disabilities.
25.	We affirm that there are different approaches, visions, models and tools available to each country, in accordance with its national circumstances and priorities, for achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions, which is our overarching goal. In this regard, we consider the green economy in the context of sustainable development and poverty eradication as one of the important tools available for achieving sustainable development. We call upon the United Nations system, in collaboration with other stakeholders, to strengthen its coordination and support of small island developing States that want to pursue green economy policies.
26.	We acknowledge that the implementation of sustainable development depends primarily on national action and leadership. We recognize that the private sector plays an increasingly important role in achieving sustainable economic development, including through public-private partnerships. We recognize that sustainable development will also depend, inter alia, on intergovernmental and international cooperation and the active engagement of both the public and private sectors.
27.	Taking into full account their national development priorities and individual country circumstances and legislation, we call for support for the efforts of small island developing States to take the following actions:
	(a)	Enhancing international cooperation, exchanges and investments in formal and non-formal education and training to create an environment that supports sustainable investments and growth. This includes the development of entrepreneurial and vocational skills, support for transitions from basic to secondary education and from school to work, the building and strengthening of education infrastructure, better health, active citizenship, respect for cultural diversity, non-discrimination and environmental consciousness for all people, including women, youth and persons with disabilities;
	(b)	Enhancing the enabling environment at the national and regional levels to attract more public and private investment in building and maintaining appropriate infrastructure, including ports, roads, transportation, electricity and power generation and information and communications technology infrastructure, and also enhancing the development impact of the private sector and the financial services industry;
	(c)	Fostering entrepreneurship and innovation, building capacity and increasing the competitiveness and social entrepreneurship of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises and State-owned enterprises in small island developing States, as well as encouraging inclusive and sustainable industrial development with the participation of all people, including the poor, women, youth and persons with disabilities;
	(d)	Supporting national, regional and international initiatives that develop and increase the capacity and development impact of the financial services industry in small island developing States;
	(e)	Creating local decent jobs through private and public projects and encouraging entrepreneurs to start up environmentally sound businesses through adequate and appropriate incentives;
	(f)	Promoting and fostering an environment conducive to increased public and private sector investment and the creation of decent jobs and livelihoods that contribute to sustainable development, with full respect for international labour standards;
	(g)	Promoting and enhancing the use of information and communications technologies for, inter alia, education, the creation of employment, in particular youth employment, and economic sustainability purposes in small island developing States;
	(h)	Promoting and enhancing gender equality and women’s equal participation, including in policies and programmes in the public and private sectors in small island developing States;
	(i)	Setting national regulatory and policy frameworks, as appropriate, that enable business and industry to advance sustainable development initiatives, taking into account the importance of transparency, accountability and corporate social responsibility.
28.	Acknowledging the way in which debt servicing limits the fiscal space of highly indebted small island developing States, we support the consideration of traditional and innovative approaches to promote the debt sustainability of highly indebted small island developing States, including their continued eligibility for concessionary financing from international financial institutions, as appropriate, and the strengthening of domestic revenue mobilization.
29.	We acknowledge the importance of addressing debt sustainability to ensure the smooth transition of those small island developing States that have graduated from least developed country status.

Sustainable tourism
30.	Recognizing that sustainable tourism represents an important driver of sustainable economic growth and decent job creation, we strongly support small island developing States in taking the following actions:
	(a)	Developing and implementing policies that promote responsive, responsible, resilient and sustainable tourism, inclusive of all peoples;
	(b)	Diversifying sustainable tourism through products and services, including large-scale tourism projects with positive economic, social and environmental impacts and the development of ecotourism, agritourism and cultural tourism;
	(c)	Promoting policies that allow local communities to gain optimum benefits from tourism while allowing them to determine the extent and nature of their participation;
	(d)	Designing and implementing participatory measures to enhance employment opportunities, in particular of women, youth and persons with disabilities, including through partnerships and capacity development, while conserving their natural, built and cultural heritage, especially ecosystems and biodiversity;
	(e)	Leveraging the expertise of, inter alia, the Global Sustainable Tourism Council, the Global Observatories on Sustainable Tourism of the World Tourism Organization, the Global Partnership for Sustainable Tourism and other United Nations bodies, as well as the 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and production patterns, to provide platforms for the exchange of best practices and direct and focused support to their national efforts;
	(f)	Establishing, upon request, an island, food and sustainable tourism support initiative based on community participation, which takes into consideration ethical values, livelihoods and human settlements, the landscape, the sea, local culture and local products, in collaboration with the World Tourism Organization, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations Human Settlements Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, regional development banks and regional and national agricultural, cultural, environmental and tourism authorities where they exist;
	(g)	Establishing and maintaining, where necessary, the governance and management structures for sustainable tourism and human settlements that bring together responsibilities and expertise in the areas of tourism, environment, health, disaster risk reduction, culture, land and housing, transportation, security and immigration, planning and development, and enabling a meaningful partnership approach among the public and private sectors and local communities.

Climate change
31.	We reaffirm that small island developing States remain a special case for sustainable development in view of their unique and particular vulnerabilities, and we acknowledge that climate change and sea-level rise continue to pose a significant risk to small island developing States and their efforts to achieve sustainable development and, for some, represent the gravest threat to their survival and viability.
32.	We also reaffirm that climate change is one of the greatest challenges of our time, and we express profound alarm that emissions of greenhouse gases continue to rise globally. We are deeply concerned that all countries, particularly developing countries, are vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change and are already experiencing an increase in such impacts, including persistent drought and extreme weather events, sea-level rise, coastal erosion and ocean acidification, further threatening food security and efforts to eradicate poverty and achieve sustainable development. In this regard, we emphasize that adaptation to climate change represents an immediate and urgent global priority.
33.	We acknowledge the leadership role of small island developing States in advocating for ambitious global efforts to address climate change, raising awareness of the need for urgent and ambitious action to address climate change at the global level and making efforts to adapt to the intensifying impacts of climate change and to further develop and implement plans, policies, strategies and legislative frameworks with support where necessary.
34.	We stress that the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change is the primary international intergovernmental forum for negotiating the global response to climate change in order to protect the global climate.
35.	We recall the objectives, principles and provisions of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,18 and underscore that the global nature of climate change calls for the widest possible cooperation by all countries and their participation in an effective and appropriate international response, with a view to accelerating the reduction of global greenhouse gas emissions. We recall that the Convention provides that parties should protect the climate system for the benefit of present and future generations of humankind on the basis of equity and in accordance with their common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities.
36.	We note with grave concern the significant gap between the aggregate effect of mitigation pledges by parties in terms of global annual emissions of greenhouse gases by 2020 and aggregate emission pathways consistent with having a likely chance of holding the increase in global average temperature below 2 degrees Celsius, or 1.5 degrees above pre-industrial levels.
37.	We reaffirm the decision of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change on long-term climate finance,19 noting the importance of climate finance in addressing climate change.
38.	We look forward to the full operationalization and initial capitalization of the Green Climate Fund, including the expeditious implementation of its initial resource mobilization process, taking into account that the Fund will play a key role in channelling new, additional, adequate and predictable financial resources to developing countries and will catalyse climate finance, both public and private, at the international and national levels.
39.	We urge developed country parties to increase technology, finance and capacity-building support to enable increased mitigation ambition and adaptation actions on the part of developing country parties.
40.	We reaffirm the importance of engaging a broad range of stakeholders at the global, regional, subregional, national and local levels, including national, subnational and local governments and the scientific community, private businesses and civil society, and also including youth and persons with disabilities, and also reaffirm that gender equality and the effective participation of women and indigenous peoples are important for effective action on all aspects of climate change.
41.	We reaffirm the decision of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to adopt a protocol, another legal instrument or an agreed outcome with legal force under the Convention applicable to all parties at its twenty-first session, to be held in Paris in December 2015, and for it to enter into effect and be implemented as from 2020.20
42.	We note the convening by the Secretary-General of the Climate Summit in New York on 23 September 2014, aimed at mobilizing actions and ambition in relation to climate change.
43.	We will work together to implement and operationalize the Warsaw international mechanism for loss and damage associated with climate change impacts21 through comprehensive, inclusive and strategic approaches to address loss and damage associated with the impacts of climate change in developing countries, including small island developing States, that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change.
44.	We call for support for the efforts of small island developing States:
	(a)	To build resilience to the impacts of climate change and to improve their adaptive capacity through the design and implementation of climate change adaptation measures appropriate to their respective vulnerabilities and economic, environmental and social situations;
	(b)	To improve the baseline monitoring of island systems and the downscaling of climate model projections to enable better projections of the future impacts on small islands;
	(c)	To raise awareness and communicate climate change risks, including through public dialogue with local communities, to increase human and environmental resilience to the longer-term impacts of climate change;
	(d)	To address remaining gaps in capacity for gaining access to and managing climate finance.
45.	We recognize that the phasing out of ozone-depleting substances is resulting in a rapid increase in the use and the release into the environment of hydrofluorocarbons with a high potential for global warming. We support the gradual phasing down of the consumption and production of hydrofluorocarbons.
46.	We recognize the importance of scaling up support for activities to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in the context of the REDDplus mechanism in small island developing States, including the implementation of the Warsaw Framework for REDD-plus.22

Sustainable energy
47.	We recognize that dependence on imported fossil fuels has been a major source of economic vulnerability and a key challenge for small island developing States for many decades and that sustainable energy, including enhanced accessibility to modern energy services, energy efficiency and use of economically viable and environmentally sound technology, plays a critical role in enabling the sustainable development of small island developing States.
48.	We highlight the efforts of small island developing States concerning sustainable energy, including through the Barbados Declaration on Achieving Sustainable Energy for All in Small Island Developing States, aimed at promoting transformational and innovative activities in such areas as access to affordable modern energy services, renewable energy, energy-efficient technologies and low carbon development, in the context of sustainable development, including, on a voluntary basis, the commitments by many small island developing States to undertake the actions contained in annex I to the Declaration. The Sustainable Energy for All initiative of the Secretary-General, which focuses on access to energy, energy efficiency and renewable energy, complemented by international commitments, provides a useful framework.
49.	We urge the international community, including regional and international development banks, bilateral donors, the United Nations system, the International Renewable Energy Agency and other relevant stakeholders to continue to provide adequate support, including in the areas of capacity-building and technology transfer, on mutually agreed terms, for the development and implementation of national, regional and interregional energy policies, plans and strategies to address the special vulnerabilities of small island developing States. We welcome the Global Renewable Energy Islands Network of the International Renewable Energy Agency, which helps small island developing States by pooling knowledge and sharing best practices.
50.	We strongly support actions:
	(a)	To develop a strategy and targeted measures to promote energy efficiency and foster sustainable energy systems based on all energy sources, in particular renewable energy sources, in small island developing States, such as wind, sustainable biomass, solar, hydroelectric, biofuel and geothermal energy;
	(b)	To facilitate access to existing financing mechanisms to increase capital flows for the implementation of sustainable energy projects in small island developing States on renewable energy and energy efficiency;
	(c)	To support investment in initiatives by and for small island developing States, in particular the “SIDS DOCK” indicative project pipeline of renewable energy and energy efficiency and conservation projects, as well as in the areas of capacity-building and human resources development and public education and awareness;
	(d)	To promote international collaboration to ensure the access of small island developing States to energy by, inter alia, strengthening their integration with regional and international energy markets and increasing the use of locally available sources of energy in the energy mix, joint infrastructure development projects and investment in production and storage capacities, in accordance with national legislation;
	(e)	To fulfil their bold and ambitious renewable energy and energy efficiency targets in small island developing States for the next decade, taking into account national circumstances, the diversification of energy systems and the provision of funds and technology on mutually agreed terms;
	(f)	To enhance international cooperation and cooperation among small island developing States for research and technological development and for the implementation of appropriate renewable energy and energy-efficient and environmentally sound technologies for small island developing States, including cleaner fossil fuel technology and smart grid technology, through the provision of, inter alia, financing from a variety of sources, the exchange of best practices and access to efficient technologies on mutually agreed terms;
	(g)	To access existing mechanisms, or, in regions with no existing mechanism, to encourage the establishment of user-friendly, accurate and comprehensive regional data repositories as online databases on energy, and to conduct technical studies and gather information on grid stability and management, including maximizing the integration of renewable energy and innovative storage mechanisms;
	(h)	To work on an integrated approach to establishing and strengthening innovative energy road maps in small island developing States, with detailed resource planning, which takes into account social, environmental and economic considerations, as well as access to energy for the poor and people in remote areas.

Disaster risk reduction
51.	We recognize that small island developing States continue to grapple with the effects of disasters, some of which have increased in intensity and some of which have been exacerbated by climate change, which impede their progress towards sustainable development. We also recognize that disasters can disproportionately affect small island developing States and that there is a critical need to build resilience, strengthen monitoring and prevention, reduce vulnerability, raise awareness and increase preparedness to respond to and recover from disasters.
52.	In consideration of the special case of small island developing States and their unique and particular vulnerabilities, we are committed to supporting their efforts:
	(a)	To gain access to technical assistance and financing for early warning systems, disaster risk reduction and post-disaster response and recovery, risk assessment and data, land use and planning, observation equipment, disaster preparedness and recovery education programmes, including under the Global Framework for Climate Services, and disaster risk management;
	(b)	To promote cooperation and investment in disaster risk management in the public and private sectors;
	(c)	To strengthen and support contingency planning and provisions for disaster preparedness and response, emergency relief and population evacuation, in particular for people in vulnerable situations, women and girls, displaced persons, children, older persons and persons with disabilities;
	(d)	To implement the Hyogo Framework for Action23 and work for an ambitious renewed international framework for post-2015 disaster risk reduction that builds on previous achievements, prioritizes prevention and mitigation and incorporates implementation frameworks to address implementation gaps if and when they exist;
	(e)	To mainstream policies and programmes related to disaster risk reduction, climate change adaptation and development, as appropriate;
	(f)	To harmonize national and regional reporting systems, where applicable, to increase synergies and coherence;
	(g)	To establish and strengthen risk insurance facilities at the national and regional levels and place disaster risk management and building resilience at the centre of policies and strategies, where applicable;
	(h)	To increase participation in international and regional disaster risk reduction initiatives.

Oceans and seas
53.	We acknowledge that oceans and seas, along with coastal areas, form an essential component of the Earth’s ecosystem and are intrinsically linked to sustainable development, including that of small island developing States. Healthy, productive and resilient oceans and coasts are critical for, inter alia, poverty eradication, access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food, livelihoods, economic development and essential ecosystem services, including carbon sequestration, and represent an important element of identity and culture for the people of small island developing States. Sustainable fisheries and aquaculture, coastal tourism, the possible use of seabed resources and potential sources of renewable energy are among the main building blocks of a sustainable ocean-based economy in small island developing States.
54.	Recognizing that small island developing States have large maritime areas and have shown notable leadership in the conservation and sustainable use of those areas and their resources, we support their efforts to develop and implement strategies for the conservation and sustainable use of those areas and resources. We also support their efforts to conserve their valuable underwater cultural heritage.
55.	We reaffirm that international law, as reflected in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,24 provides the legal framework for the conservation and sustainable use of oceans and their resources.
56.	Recognizing the concern that potential oil leaks from sunken State vessels have environmental implications for the marine and coastal ecosystems of small island developing States, and taking into account the sensitivities surrounding vessels that are marine graves, we note that small island developing States and relevant vessel owners should continue to address the issue bilaterally on a case-by-case basis.
57.	We recognize that an integrated ecosystem approach to ocean-related activities is needed to optimize opportunities. It should be based on the best available science, give due regard to conservation efforts and precautionary approaches and ensure coherence and balance among the three dimensions of sustainable development.
58.	With this in mind, we strongly support action:
	(a)	To promote and support national, subregional and regional efforts to assess, conserve, protect, manage and sustainably use the oceans, seas and their resources by supporting research and the implementation of strategies on coastal zone management and ecosystem-based management, including for fisheries management, and enhancing national legal and institutional frameworks for the exploration and sustainable use of living and non-living resources;
	(b)	To engage in national and regional efforts to sustainably develop the ocean resources of small island developing States and generate increasing returns for their peoples;
	(c)	To implement fully and effectively the regional seas programmes in which small island developing States participate;
	(d)	To address marine pollution by developing effective partnerships, including through the development and implementation of relevant arrangements, such as the United Nations Environment Programme Global Programme of Action for the Protection of the Marine Environment from Land-based Activities,25 and, as appropriate, instruments on marine debris and on nutrient, wastewater and other marine pollution, and through the sharing and implementation of best practices;
	(e)	To undertake urgent action to protect coral reefs and other vulnerable marine ecosystems through the development and implementation of comprehensive and integrated approaches for the management and the enhancement of their resilience to withstand pressures, including from ocean acidification and invasive species, and by drawing on measures such as those identified in the Framework for Action 2013 of the International Coral Reef Initiative;
	(f)	To undertake marine scientific research and develop the associated technological capacity of small island developing States, including through the establishment of dedicated regional oceanographic centres and the provision of technical assistance, for the delimitation of their maritime areas and the preparation of submissions to the Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf;
	(g)	To enhance and implement the monitoring, control and surveillance of fishing vessels so as to effectively prevent, deter and eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, including through institutional capacity-building at the appropriate levels;
	(h)	To support the sustainable development of small-scale fisheries, improved mechanisms for resource assessment and management and enhanced facilities for fisheries workers, as well as initiatives that add value to outputs from small-scale fisheries, and to enhance access to markets for the products of sustainable small-scale fisheries of small island developing States;
	(i)	To strengthen disciplines on subsidies in the fisheries sector, including through the prohibition of certain forms of subsidies that contribute to overcapacity and overfishing, in accordance with the Doha Ministerial Declaration adopted by the World Trade Organization in 200126 and the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration adopted by the World Trade Organization in 2005;
	(j)	For States that have not done so, to consider becoming parties to the 2001 United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage;27
	(k)	To promote the conservation, sustainable use and management of straddling and highly migratory fish stocks, including through measures that benefit small island developing States that are adopted by relevant regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements;
	(l)	To enhance the capacity of small island developing States to sustainably use their fisheries resources and develop fisheries-related industries, enabling them to maximize benefits from their fisheries resources and ensure that the burden of conservation and management of ocean resources is not disproportionately transferred to small island developing States;
	(m)	To urge the cooperation of the international community in implementing shared responsibilities under regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements to enable small island developing States to benefit from and sustainably manage straddling and highly migratory fish stocks covered by those organizations and arrangements;
	(n)	To enhance local, national, regional and global cooperation to address the causes of ocean acidification and to further study and minimize its impacts, including through information-sharing, regional workshops, the integration of scientists from small island developing States into international research teams, steps to make marine ecosystems more resilient to the impacts of ocean acidification and the possible development of a strategy for all small island developing States on ocean acidification;
	(o)	To conserve by 2020 at least 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas in small island developing States, especially areas of particular importance for biodiversity and for ecosystem services, through effectively and equitably managed, ecologically representative and well-connected systems of protected areas and other effective area-based conservation measures in order to reduce the rate of biodiversity loss in the marine environment;
	(p)	To address concerns about the long-term effects of munitions dumped at sea, including their potential impact on human health and safety and on the marine environment and resources.

Food security and nutrition
59.	We recognize that small island developing States, primarily net food-importing countries, are exceptionally vulnerable to the fluctuating availability and excessive price volatility of food imports. It is therefore important to support the right of everyone to have access to safe, sufficient and nutritious food, the eradication of hunger and the provision of livelihoods while conserving, protecting and ensuring the sustainable use of land, soil, forests, water, plants and animals, biodiversity and ecosystems. We stress the crucial role of healthy marine ecosystems, sustainable agriculture, sustainable fisheries and sustainable aquaculture for enhancing food security and access to adequate, safe and nutritious food and in providing for the livelihoods of the people of the small island developing States.
60.	We also recognize the danger caused by an unhealthy diet and the need to promote healthy food production and consumption.
61.	We recognize the call, in the outcome of the interregional preparatory meeting for the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States, adopted in Bridgetown on 28 August 2013,28 to facilitate a meeting on food and nutrition security in small island developing States in order to develop an action programme to address food and nutrition challenges facing those States, and we invite the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to facilitate this biennial forum.
62.	We note the convening of the Second International Conference on Nutrition in Rome in November 2014, organized by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Health Organization, which has important implications for small island developing States, and look forward to its outcome.
63.	In this regard, we are committed to working together to support the efforts of small island developing States:
	(a)	To promote the further use of sustainable practices relating to agriculture, crops, livestock, forestry, fisheries and aquaculture to improve food and nutrition security while ensuring the sustainable management of the required water resources;
	(b)	To promote open and efficient international and domestic markets to support economic development and optimize food security and nutrition;
	(c)	To enhance international cooperation to maintain access to global food markets, particularly during periods of higher volatility in commodity markets;
	(d)	To increase rural income and jobs, with a focus on the empowerment of smallholders and small-scale food producers, especially women;
	(e)	To end malnutrition in all its forms, including by securing year-round access to sufficient, safe, affordable, diverse and nutritious food;
	(f)	To enhance the resilience of agriculture and fisheries to the adverse impacts of climate change, ocean acidification and natural disasters;
	(g)	To maintain natural ecological processes that support sustainable food production systems through international technical cooperation.

Water and sanitation
64.	We recognize that small island developing States face numerous challenges with respect to freshwater resources, including pollution, the overexploitation of surface, ground and coastal waters, saline intrusion, drought and water scarcity, soil erosion, water and wastewater treatment and the lack of access to sanitation and hygiene. Furthermore, changes in rainfall patterns related to climate change have regionally varying and potentially significant impacts on water supply.
65.	In this regard, we are committed to supporting the efforts of small island developing States:
	(a)	To develop institutional and human capacities for the effective, inclusive and sustainable implementation of the integrated management of water resources and related ecosystems, including supporting women’s engagement in water management systems;
	(b)	To provide and operate appropriate facilities and infrastructure for safe drinking water, sanitation, hygiene and waste management systems, including the exploration of desalination technology where economically and environmentally feasible;
	(c)	To facilitate the expansion of wastewater treatment, recycling and reuse in the context of the sustainable and efficient use of water resources;
	(d)	To improve water-use efficiency and work towards eliminating over-extraction, especially of groundwater, and to mitigate the effects of saltwater intrusion.

Sustainable transportation
66.	We recognize that transportation and mobility are central to the sustainable development of small island developing States. Sustainable transportation can enhance economic growth, promote trade opportunities and improve accessibility. Sustainable, reliable and safe transportation achieves better integration of the economy while respecting the environment. We also recognize the importance of the efficient movement of people and goods in fostering full engagement in local, regional and global markets and the potential for sustainable transportation to improve social equity, health, the resilience of cities, urban-rural linkages and the productivity of rural areas of small island developing States.
67.	In this regard, we are committed to continuing and enhancing support for the efforts of small island developing States:
	(a)	To gain access to environmentally sound, safe, affordable and well-maintained transportation;
	(b)	To advance the safety of land, sea and air transportation;
	(c)	To develop viable national, regional and international transportation arrangements, including improved air, land and sea transport policies that take a life-cycle approach to the development and management of transport infrastructure;
	(d)	To increase energy efficiency in the transport sector.

Sustainable consumption and production
68.	As promoting sustainable patterns of consumption and production is an overarching objective of and essential requirement for sustainable development, we recall the 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and production patterns and its vision, and we recognize that all countries should promote sustainable consumption and production patterns, with developed countries taking the lead and all countries benefiting from the process. This should be done in accordance with national objectives, needs and priorities, taking fully into account the specific needs and conditions of developing countries with the aim of minimizing the possible adverse impacts on their development, and in a manner that protects the poor and affected communities.
69.	In this regard, we call for support for the efforts of small island developing States to develop and implement programmes under the 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and production patterns to advance sustainable consumption and production, with an emphasis on micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, sustainable tourism, waste management, food and nutrition, lifestyles, education for sustainable development and linkages in the supply chain to promote rural development.

Management of chemicals and waste, including hazardous waste
70.	We recognize that the sound management of chemicals throughout their life cycle and of waste is crucial for the protection of human health and the environment. For small island developing States, as for all countries, environmentally sound waste management is also crucial for human health and environmental protection, and the small land area and remoteness of many small island developing States pose particular challenges for the sound disposal of waste.
71.	In this regard, we acknowledge the following actions to improve the management of chemicals and waste:
	(a)	Enhancing technical cooperation programmes, including those under the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal,29 the Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management of the United Nations Environment Programme, the secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme, the London Convention and Protocol and the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, to strengthen national, regional and international mechanisms for the management of waste, including chemical and hazardous waste, ship- and aircraft-generated waste and marine plastic litter, and further strengthening and expanding geographic coverage of oil spill contingency plans;
	(b)	For States that have not done so, considering becoming parties to and ensuring an enabling environment for the implementation, including with technical and other appropriate support, of the multilateral environmental agreements on chemicals and waste and implementing, as appropriate, the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals and the Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management;
	(c)	Facilitating improved access to existing capacity-building programmes, such as those under the International Health Regulations of the World Health Organization, which call for strengthened management of specific risks, including control programmes for chemical and other toxic and environmental events;
	(d)	Implementing reduction, reuse, recycling, recovery and return approaches in accordance with national capacities and priorities, inter alia, through capacity-building and environmentally appropriate technologies.

Health and non-communicable diseases
72.	We recognize that health is a precondition for and an outcome and indicator of all three dimensions of sustainable development. Sustainable development can be achieved only in the absence of a high prevalence of debilitating communicable and non-communicable diseases, including emerging and re-emerging diseases, and when populations can reach a state of physical, mental and social well-being.
73.	We recognize that the burden and threat of communicable and non-communicable diseases remain serious global concerns and constitute one of the major challenges for small island developing States in the twenty-first century. While prevention, treatment, care and education are critical, we call upon the international community to support the national actions of small island developing States in addressing communicable and non-communicable diseases.
74.	We take note of the outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the comprehensive review and assessment of the progress achieved in the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases.30
75.	In this regard, we reaffirm our commitment to support the efforts of small island developing States:
	(a)	To develop and implement comprehensive, whole-government multisectoral policies and strategies for the prevention and management of diseases, including through the strengthening of health systems, the promotion of effective universal health coverage implementation, the distribution of medical and drug supplies, education and public awareness and incentivizing people to lead healthier lives through a healthy diet, good nutrition, sports and education;
	(b)	To develop specific national programmes and policies geared towards the strengthening of health systems for the achievement of universal coverage of health services and the distribution of medical and drug supplies, with the assistance of the United Nations Children’s Fund, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Population Fund, key development partners and other stakeholders, at the invitation of small island developing States;
	(c)	To take urgent steps to establish, for the period from 2015 to 2025, 10-year targets and strategies to reverse the spread and severity of non-communicable diseases;
	(d)	To implement well-planned and value-added interventions that strengthen health promotion, promote primary health care and develop accountability mechanisms for monitoring non-communicable diseases;
	(e)	To enable cooperation among small island developing States on diseases by using existing international and regional forums to convene joint biennial meetings of ministers of health and other relevant sectors to respond in particular to non-communicable diseases;
	(f)	To achieve universal access to HIV prevention, treatment, care and support and to eliminate mother-to-child transmission of HIV, as well as to renew and strengthen the fight against malaria, tuberculosis and neglected emerging and re-emerging tropical diseases, including chikungunya and dengue;
	(g)	To reduce maternal, newborn and child mortality and improve the health of mothers, infants and children.

Gender equality and women’s empowerment
76.	We recognize that gender equality and women’s empowerment and the full realization of human rights for women and girls have a transformative and multiplier effect on sustainable development and are a driver of economic growth in small island developing States. Women can be powerful agents of change.
77.	In this regard, we support the efforts of small island developing States:
	(a)	To eliminate all forms of discrimination against women and girls;
	(b)	To integrate a gender perspective in priority areas for sustainable development;
	(c)	To strengthen women’s economic empowerment and ensure equal access to full and productive employment and decent work;
	(d)	To end all forms of violence against women and girls;
	(e)	To continue to take measures to ensure women’s full, equal and effective participation in all fields and leadership at all levels of decision-making in the public and private sectors through such policies and actions as temporary special measures, as appropriate, and by setting and working to achieve concrete goals, targets and benchmarks;
	(f)	To guarantee equal access to good-quality education and health care;
	(g)	To ensure in small island developing States the promotion and protection of the human rights of all women and their sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights in accordance with the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development, the Beijing Platform for Action and the outcome documents of their review conferences;
	(h)	To tackle the structural and socioeconomic inequalities and multiple intersecting forms of discrimination that affect women and girls, including those with disabilities, that hinder progress and development;
	(i)	To give women equal rights with men to economic resources, including access to, ownership of and control over land and other forms of property, credit, inheritance, natural resources and appropriate new technologies.

Social development
78.	We recognize that social development, as one of the three dimensions of sustainable development, is crucial to ensuring development progress by small island developing States both now and in the future. We therefore support efforts to enhance social protection and inclusion, to improve well-being and to guarantee opportunities for the most vulnerable and disadvantaged.
79.	We support small island developing States in their commitment to an approach to development that is focused on poverty eradication, which should ensure that people, particularly those living in poverty, have equal access to education, health, food, water and sanitation and other public and social services and access to productive resources, including credit, land, training, knowledge, information and know-how. That approach enables citizens and local communities to participate in decision-making on social development policies and programmes.

Culture and sport
80.	We recognize that small island developing States possess a wealth of culture, which is a driver and an enabler for sustainable development. In particular, indigenous and traditional knowledge and cultural expression, which underscores the deep connections among people, culture, knowledge and the natural environment, can meaningfully advance sustainable development and social cohesion.
81.	In this regard, we strongly support the efforts of small island developing States:
	(a)	To promote cultural diversity, intercultural dialogue and international cooperation in the cultural field in line with applicable international conventions, in particular those of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
	(b)	To leverage and build on the joint work of the World Intellectual Property Organization and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
	(c)	To develop and strengthen national and regional cultural activities and infrastructures, including through the network of World Heritage sites, which reinforce local capacities, promote awareness in small island developing States, enhance tangible and intangible cultural heritage, including local and indigenous knowledge, and involve local people for the benefit of present and future generations;
	(d)	To develop cultural and creative industries, including tourism, that capitalize on their rich heritage and have a role to play in sustainable and inclusive growth;
	(e)	To develop domestic mechanisms to conserve, promote, protect and preserve their natural, tangible and intangible cultural heritage practices and traditional knowledge.
82.	Recognizing the strong capacity of small island developing States in sport, we support the use of sport as a vehicle to foster development, social inclusion and peace, strengthen education, promote health and build life skills, particularly among youth.

Promoting peaceful societies and safe communities
83.	We recognize the importance of supporting small island developing States in their ongoing efforts to ensure peaceful societies and safe communities, including through building responsive and accountable institutions and ensuring access to justice and respect for all human rights, taking into account their national priorities and legislations.
84.	We recognize that the sustainable development of small island developing States can be negatively affected by crime and violence, including conflict, gang and youth violence, piracy, trafficking in persons, cybercrime, drug trafficking and transnational organized crime. In particular, the lack of sustainable livelihoods and opportunities for further education and the breaking down of community support structures can lead to increasing numbers of young men and women becoming involved in violence and crime.
85.	We support the efforts of small island developing States to combat trafficking in persons, cybercrime, drug trafficking, transnational organized crime and international piracy by promoting the accession, ratification and implementation of applicable conventions, enacting and using legislation that prohibits trafficking, promoting strong institutions and improving protection mechanisms to ensure adequate care for victims of sex trafficking and forced labour in accordance with relevant national and international agreements and treaties.
86.	We support the development of action plans in small island developing States to eliminate violence against women and girls, who are often targets of gender-based violence and are disproportionately affected by crime, violence and conflict, and to ensure that they are centrally involved in all relevant processes.

Education
87.	We reaffirm that full and equal access to quality education at all levels is an essential condition for achieving sustainable development and the importance of local, national, regional and international efforts in this regard.
88.	We are committed, in this regard, to strongly supporting the efforts of small island developing States:
	(a)	To provide high-quality education and training for youth and girls with a focus on the most vulnerable, in particular persons with disabilities, including in creative, cultural and environment-related fields, so that all people have the necessary skills and can take advantage of employment opportunities to lead productive lives;
	(b)	To ensure that education contributes to further building peace and promoting social inclusion;
	(c)	To increase their investment in education, training and skills development for all, including vocational training, and to improve their access to formal and non-formal education, including to gain entrepreneurial skills, through both formal and non-formal means, such as the use of distance teaching and the development of training approaches appropriate for small island developing States.

Biodiversity
89.	We agree to promote international cooperation and partnerships, as appropriate, and information exchange, and in this context we welcome the United Nations Decade on Biodiversity, 2011–2020, for the purpose of encouraging the active involvement of all stakeholders in the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, as well as their access to and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources, with the vision of living in harmony with nature.
90.	We recognize that, overall, small island developing States have extraordinary marine and terrestrial biodiversity that in many cases is fundamental to their livelihoods and identity. Noting that this valuable biodiversity and the ecosystem services it provides are at grave risk, we strongly support the efforts of small island developing States:
	(a)	To conserve biological diversity, the sustainable use of its components and the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resources;
	(b)	To export organic, natural, sustainably produced and locally grown products;
	(c)	To access financial and technical resources for the conservation and sustainable management of biodiversity.
91.	We invite parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity31 to consider ratifying and implementing the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from Their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity,32 while acknowledging that having access to and sharing the benefits of genetic resources contribute to the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, poverty eradication and sustainable development.

Desertification, land degradation and drought
92.	We recognize that addressing desertification, land degradation and drought challenges will be critical for the achievement by small island developing States of food security and nutrition, their adaptation to climate change, the protection of their biodiversity and the development of resilience to natural disasters. We also strongly support the efforts of small island developing States in designing and implementing preparedness and resilience policies relating to desertification, land degradation and drought as a matter of priority and in catalysing financial resources from a range of public and private sources, as well as in promoting the sustainability of their limited soil resources.
93.	We acknowledge the decision of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa entitled “Follow-up to the outcomes of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20)”,33 in which the Conference of the Parties established an intergovernmental working group to, inter alia, establish a science-based definition of land degradation neutrality in arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas.

Forests
94.	Recognizing that forests are vital to livelihoods and ecosystems, we strongly support the efforts of small island developing States:
	(a)	To implement the non-legally binding instrument on all types of forests;34
	(b)	To slow, halt and reverse deforestation and forest degradation, including by promoting trade in legally and sustainably harvested forest products;
	(c)	To achieve appropriate and effective reforestation, restoration and afforestation;
	(d)	To address obstacles and pursue opportunities to mobilize financing from all sources to support national sustainable forest management policies and improve the state of biological diversity by conserving and safeguarding ecosystems, species and genetic diversity;
	(e)	To participate in the review of the international arrangement on forests under the United Nations Forum on Forests in order to explore the full range of options on the future of the arrangement;
	(f)	To strengthen their legal, institutional and human capacity for sustainable forest management on the basis of a holistic and integrated approach to the sustainable use of forest resources.

Invasive alien species
95.	Noting that invasive alien species pose a threat to sustainable development and undermine the efforts of small island developing States to protect biodiversity and livelihoods, preserve and maintain ocean resources and ecosystem resiliency, enhance food security and adapt to climate change, we call for support for the efforts of small island developing States:
	(a)	To enhance multisectoral collaboration at the national, regional and international levels, including through expanded support to existing structures, to effectively address invasive alien species;
	(b)	To improve efforts to eradicate and control invasive alien species, including through the provision of support for research on and the development of new technologies by expanding collaboration and supporting existing regional and international structures;
	(c)	To develop and strengthen their capacity to address invasive alien species issues, including prevention, as well as increasing public awareness in small island developing States about this issue.

Means of implementation, including partnerships
96.	While acknowledging the primary responsibility of small island developing States for their own sustainable development, we recognize that the persistent development challenges of the small island developing States require enhanced global partnership for development, adequate provision and mobilization of all means of implementation and continued international support to achieve internationally agreed goals.

Partnerships
97.	We call for an increase in all forms of partnership with and for small island developing States.
98.	We recognize that, given the vulnerabilities and the need to build the resilience of small island developing States, and keeping in mind the theme of the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States, there is an urgent need to strengthen international cooperation and ensure genuine and durable partnerships at the national, regional and international levels to address issues related to their sustainable development priorities and needs.
99.	We also call for enhanced international cooperation, including North-South, South-South and triangular cooperation, and especially cooperation among small island developing States. We reaffirm that North-South cooperation remains the core type of international cooperation and that South-South cooperation is not a substitute for, but rather a complement to, North-South cooperation. We recognize that genuine and durable partnerships will play an important role in advancing sustainable development by harnessing the full potential of engagement between governments at all levels, businesses, civil society and a wide range of other stakeholders. We further recognize that partnerships are effective instruments for mobilizing human and financial resources, expertise, technology and knowledge and can be powerful drivers for change, innovation and welfare.
100.	We reaffirm that small island developing States are equal partners and that empowered, genuine and durable partnerships are based on mutual collaboration and ownership, trust, alignment, harmonization, respect, results orientation, accountability and transparency and that political will is required to undertake and implement long-term, predictable commitments. Partnerships in all their forms, regardless of size and economic value, should be utilized, enhanced and strengthened to ensure the meaningful engagement of various actors (including local authorities, civil society and non-governmental organizations, foundations, the private sector and international financial institutions) and should work to achieve the small island developing States’ vision of self-reliance and to cooperate in the implementation of national policies that help to fulfil the commitments made in the Barbados Programme of Action, the Mauritius Strategy, the Samoa Pathway, the Millennium Development Goals and other international declarations and instruments.
101.	In this regard, we request the Secretary-General, in consultation with Member States, to present recommendations, including through the use of existing intergovernmental mechanisms, for a partnership framework to monitor and ensure the full implementation of pledges and commitments through partnerships for small island developing States. The framework should ensure that partnerships focus on the priorities of small island developing States, identify new opportunities to advance their sustainable development of and ensure the full implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action, the Mauritius Strategy and the Samoa Pathway. The recommendations should be presented to the General Assembly for consideration and action at its sixty-ninth session.

Financing
102.	We recognize that financing from all sources, domestic and international, public and private, the development and transfer of reliable, affordable, modern technology on mutually agreed terms, capacity-building assistance and enabling institutional and policy environments at all levels are critically important means of advancing sustainable development in small island developing States. As those States have unique and particular vulnerabilities that require dedicated attention, they will continue to make use of a wide range of available financing mechanisms to implement the Barbados Programme of Action, the Mauritius Strategy and the Samoa Pathway.
103.	We recognize that international financing plays an important role in increasing the capacity of small island developing States to mitigate and effectively respond to multiple crises by increasing the impact of existing funds and mobilizing, catalysing and directly providing financial resources from a variety of public and private sources, including international financial institutions, to support the implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action, the Mauritius Strategy and the Samoa Pathway.
104.	We urge all countries to fulfil their commitments to small island developing States, including through the provision of financial resources, to support the Barbados Programme of Action, the Mauritius Strategy and the Samoa Pathway. In this regard, the fulfilment of all official development assistance commitments to developing countries, including the commitments by many developed countries to achieve the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national income for official development assistance to developing countries by 2015, as well as the target of 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of gross national income for official development assistance to least developed countries, is crucial.
105.	We welcome increasing efforts to improve the quality of official development assistance and to increase its development impact. We also recognize the need to improve development effectiveness, increase programme-based approaches, use country systems for activities managed by the public sector, reduce transaction costs and improve mutual accountability and transparency, and in this regard we call upon all donors to untie aid to the maximum extent. Furthermore, we will make development more effective and predictable by providing developing countries with regular and timely indicative information on planned support over the medium term. We recognize the importance of the efforts of developing countries to strengthen leadership regarding their own development, national institutions, systems and capacity to ensure the best results for effective development by engaging with parliaments and citizens in shaping those policies and deepening engagement with civil society organizations. We should also bear in mind that there is no one-size-fits-all formula that will guarantee development effectiveness. The specific situation of each country must be fully considered.
106.	In this regard, we reaffirm our commitment to support the efforts of small island developing States:
	(a)	To strengthen the use of domestic policies and financing, with due consideration for their respective levels of indebtedness and national capacities;
	(b)	To gain access to international arrangements and modalities for the financing of development for developing countries, particularly small island developing States, including through capacity-building and a review of application procedures;
	(c)	To implement, with the provision of appropriate financial resources, in line with existing international commitments within the framework of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, climate change adaptation and mitigation projects;
	(d)	To reduce transfer costs related to remittances while pursuing the international targets and agreed outcomes of important international initiatives set by the United Nations system concerning remittances, given their importance for the economic growth of small island developing States.

Trade
107.	Given the unique and particular vulnerabilities of small island developing States, for example, small size, limited negotiating capacity and remoteness from markets, we recognize that efforts are needed to support their further integration regionally and between the regions and in world markets. With this in mind, we strongly support the efforts of small island developing States:
	(a)	To encourage their successful engagement in trade and economic agreements, taking into consideration existing special and differential treatment provisions, as appropriate, and taking note of the work conducted to date under the work programme on small economies of the World Trade Organization;
	(b)	To obtain technical assistance through trade-related assistance mechanisms and other programmes to strengthen their capacity to effectively participate in the multilateral trading system, including with respect to explaining trade rules and disciplines, negotiating and implementing trade agreements and formulating and administering coherent trade policies, with a view to improving trade competitiveness as well as development and growth prospects;
	(c)	To assess the implications and mitigate the impact of non-tariff barriers to their market access opportunities through, inter alia, appropriate technical assistance and the implementation of the Trade Facilitation Agreement of the World Trade Organization;
	(d)	To develop and strengthen partnerships to enhance the participation of small island developing States in the international trade in goods and services, build their productive capacities and address their supply side constraints.

Capacity-building
108.	We affirm that small island developing States require continued and enhanced investments in education and training programmes to develop human and institutional capacities so as to build the resilience of their societies and economies, while encouraging the use and retention of knowledge in all its forms, including traditional knowledge, within those States and ensuring accountability and transparency in all capacity-building efforts by all parties.
109.	In this regard, we strongly support the efforts of small island developing States:
	(a)	To improve existing mechanisms and resources to provide coordinated and coherent United Nations system-wide capacity-building programmes for small island developing States through United Nations country teams, in collaboration with national agencies, regional commissions and intergovernmental organizations, to enhance national capacities and institutions, building on the lessons and successes of the Capacity 2015 initiative;
	(b)	To strengthen their national institutions to complement capacity-building;
	(c)	To ensure the inclusion of capacity-building and institution-strengthening, as appropriate, in all cooperation frameworks and partnerships and their integration in the priorities and work programmes of all United Nations agencies providing assistance to small island developing States in concert with other development efforts, within their existing mandates and resources;
	(d)	To establish a dedicated intensive training programme for sustainable development for small island developing States in the University Consortium of Small Island States;
	(e)	To strengthen technical assistance programmes in partnership with the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation and regional institutions in small island developing States;
	(f)	To build national capacity, where appropriate, to utilize cost-benefit analysis for informed policymaking in the area of sustainable development, including models specific to small island developing States that evaluate the technical, financial, social, economic and environmental aspects related to the accession, ratification and implementation of multilateral environmental agreements and related instruments;
	(g)	To build national capacity to fulfil reporting requirements deriving from commitments made by small island developing States when signing international agreements and commitments;
	(h)	To establish national and regional information and communications technology platforms and information dissemination hubs in small island developing States to facilitate information exchange and cooperation, building on existing information and communications platforms, as appropriate;
	(i)	To enhance regional and interregional cooperation among small island developing States on education and training so as to identify and apply appropriate good practices as solutions to shared challenges;
	(j)	To ensure that women are fully and equally able to benefit from capacity development and that institutions are inclusive and supportive of women at all levels, including at the senior leadership levels.

Technology
110.	We recognize that access by small island developing States to appropriate reliable, affordable, modern and environmentally sound technologies is critical to achieving their sustainable development objectives and in fostering an environment that provides incentives for innovation and entrepreneurship and that science, technology and innovation are essential enablers and drivers for sustainable development.
111.	In this regard, we reaffirm our commitment to support the efforts of small island developing States to gain access, on mutually agreed terms, to appropriate, reliable, affordable, modern and environmentally sound technologies and know-how and to increase connectivity and the use of information and communications technology through improved infrastructure, training and national legislation, as well as public and private sector involvement.

Data and statistics
112.	We reaffirm the role that data and statistics play in development planning in small island developing States and the need for the United Nations system to collect statistics from those States, irrespective of size and in the least burdensome way, by, inter alia, allowing electronic submission and, where appropriate, submissions through competent regional agencies.
113.	We recognize that improved data collection and statistical analysis are required to enable small island developing States to effectively plan, follow up on, evaluate the implementation of and track successes in attaining the internationally agreed development goals.
114.	In this regard, we reaffirm our commitment to support the efforts of small island developing States:
	(a)	To strengthen the availability and accessibility of their data and statistical systems, in accordance with national priorities and circumstances, and enhance their management of complex data systems, including geospatial data platforms, by launching new partnership initiatives or scaling up existing initiatives;
	(b)	To utilize existing United Nations statistical standards and resources in the areas of social and environmental statistics;
	(c)	To improve the collection, analysis, dissemination and use of gender statistics and data disaggregated by sex, age, disability and other relevant variables in a systemic and coordinated manner at the national level, through appropriate financial and technical support and capacity-building, while recognizing the need for international cooperation in this regard.
115.	Furthermore, we call upon the United Nations, the specialized agencies and relevant intergovernmental organizations, in accordance with their respective mandates:
	(a)	To make greater use of the national statistics and development indicators of small island developing States, where available;
	(b)	To support a sustainable development statistics and information programme for small island developing States;
	(c)	To elaborate appropriate indices for assessing the progress made in the sustainable development of small island developing States that better reflect their vulnerability and guide them to adopt more informed policies and strategies for building and sustaining long-term resilience and to strengthen national disaggregated data and information systems as well as analytical capabilities for decision-making, the tracking of progress and the development of vulnerability-resilience country profiles.

Institutional support for small island developing States
116.	We call upon the United Nations system, international and regional financial institutions and other multilateral development partners to continue to support small island developing States in their efforts to implement national sustainable development strategies and programmes by incorporating the priorities and activities of small island developing States into their relevant strategic and programmatic frameworks, including through the United Nations Development Assistance Framework, at both the national and regional levels, in line with their mandates and overall priorities.
117.	In this regard, we call upon the United Nations system to provide support:
	(a)	To ensure that United Nations entities take fully into account the issues of small island developing States and include support for those States and the development of their capacities in their programmes at the appropriate levels;
	(b)	To continue to enhance, through national and regional initiatives, the voice and participation of small island developing States in the decision-making and norm-setting processes of international financial institutions;
	(c)	To improve interregional and intraregional cooperation and collaboration among small island developing States, including, where required, through institutional mechanisms and capacity-building;
	(d)	To ensure that the issues of small island developing States are adequately addressed by the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, as well as the high-level political forum on sustainable development convened under their auspices.
118.	We call upon the Committee for Development Policy of the Economic and Social Council to continue to give due consideration to the unique and particular vulnerabilities of small island developing States and to continue to monitor regularly, together with their Governments, the progress of small island developing States that have graduated from least developed country status.
119.	We request that the Secretary-General conduct a comprehensive review of United Nations system support for small island developing States with a view to enhancing the overall effectiveness of such support and the respective roles in supporting the sustainable development of small island developing States, and we invite the General Assembly, at its sixty-ninth session, to determine the parameters of the review. We request the Secretary-General, building on previous reports, to provide to the Assembly at its seventieth session the findings of the review and his recommendations thereon in his regular report entitled “Follow-up to and implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States”.
120.	We request the Secretary-General to ensure that the Small Island Developing States Unit of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat continues, pursuant to its support and advisory services mandate, its analysis and reporting on the situation of small island developing States, including in the implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action, the Mauritius Strategy and the Samoa Pathway, and that the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States, pursuant to its advocacy mandate, ensure the mainstreaming of the Samoa Pathway and issues related to small island developing States in the work of the United Nations system and enhance the coherence of the issues of those States in United Nations processes, including at the national, regional and global levels, and continue to mobilize international support and resources to support the implementation of the Samoa Pathway by small island developing States.

Priorities of the small island developing States for the post-2015 development agenda
121.	Recalling that the small island developing States have identified their priorities for the post-2015 development agenda in the outcome document of the interregional preparatory meeting for the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States, as further refined in the present outcome document, we recognize the need to give due consideration to those priorities in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda.

Monitoring and accountability
122.	To ensure the realization of a transformational strategy for the sustainable development of small island developing States, we call upon the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and their subsidiary bodies to monitor the full implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action, the Mauritius Strategy and the Samoa Pathway, including through the monitoring frameworks of the regional commissions.
123.	We recall that the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, as well as the high-level political forum on sustainable development convened under their auspices, will devote adequate time to the discussion of the sustainable development challenges facing small island developing States in order to enhance engagement and implement commitments.
124.	In this regard, we are committed to supporting the efforts of small island developing States:
	(a)	To request the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly and to the Economic and Social Council on the progress achieved in implementing the priorities, commitments, partnerships and other activities of the small island developing States;
	(b)	To request the Department of Economic and Social Affairs to continue to maintain a partnerships platform focused on the small island developing States and to regularly convene the inter-agency consultative group to report on the full implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action, the Mauritius Strategy and the Samoa Pathway, with adequate and timely analysis based on relevant targets and indicators relevant to the small island developing States in order to ensure accountability at all levels.

1 Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
2 Ibid., annex II.
3 Resolution S-19/2, annex.
4 Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
5 Ibid., resolution 1, annex.
6 Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
7 Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
8 Resolution 66/288, annex.
9 Resolution 55/2.
10 Resolution 60/1.
11 Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
12 Resolution 63/239, annex.
13 Resolution 65/1.
14 Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
15 Resolution S-21/2, annex.
16 Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
17 Resolution 217 A (III).
18 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
19 FCCC/CP/2013/10/Add.1, decision 3/CP.19.
20 See FCCC/CP/2011/9/Add.1, decision 1/CP.17.
21 See FCCC/CP/2013/10/Add.1, decision 2/CP.19.
22 Ibid., decisions 9/CP.19–15/CP.19; see also FCCC/CP/2013/10 and Corr.1, para. 44.
23 Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters (A/CONF.206/6 and Corr.1, chap. I, resolution 2).
24 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1833, No. 31363.
25 A/51/116, annex II.
26 A/C.2/56/7, annex.
27 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2562, No. 45694.
28 A/CONF.223/PC/2, annex.
29 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1673, No. 28911.
30 Resolution 68/300.
31 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
32 See United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex, decision X/1.
33 ICCD/COP(11)/23/Add.1 and Corr.1, decision 8/COP.11.
34 Resolution 62/98, annex.
[DU1]<<ODS JOB NO>>N1462845E<<ODS JOB NO>>
<<ODS DOC SYMBOL1>>A/RES/69/15<<ODS DOC SYMBOL1>>
<<ODS DOC SYMBOL2>><<ODS DOC SYMBOL2>>
_______________

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

3
    

3

United NationsA/RES/69/15General AssemblyDistr.: General
15 December 2014Sixty-ninth session
Agenda item 13 (a)

14-64816 (E)
*1464816*Please recycle 

A/RES/69/15SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway

SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) PathwayA/RES/69/15

30/30

29/30

