Agenda 2063
Final Edition, April 2015
Popular version
The Africa We Want
Final edition published in 2015
© African Union Commission
ISBN: 978-92-95104-23-5
1
THE VOICES OF THE AFRICAN PEOPLE
1. We, the people of Africa and her Diaspora, united in diversity, young and
old, men and women, girls and boys from all walks of life, deeply conscious
of history, express our deep appreciation to all generations of Pan-Africanists.
In particular, to the founders of the Organisation of African Unity for having
bequeathed us an Africa with exemplary successes in the fight against slavery,
colonialism and apartheid. Agenda 2063, rooted in Pan Africanism and African
Renaissance, provides a robust framework for addressing past injustices and
the realisation of the 21st Century as the African Century.
2. We echo the Pan-African call that Africa must unite in order to realize its
Renaissance. Present generations are confident that the destiny of Africa is
in their hands, and that they must act now to shape the future they want. Fifty
years after the first thirty-three (33) independent African states took a landmark
decision to form the Organization of African Unity, we are looking ahead
towards the next fifty years.
3. In this new and noble initiative, past plans and commitments have been
reviewed, and we pledge to take into account lessons from them as we
implement Agenda 2063. These include: mobilization of the people and their
ownership of continental programmes at the core; the principle of self-reliance
and Africa financing its own development; the importance of capable, inclusive
and accountable states and institutions at all levels and in all spheres; the critical
role of Regional Economic Communities as building blocks for continental
unity; taking into account of the special challenges faced by both island and
land-locked states; and holding ourselves and our governments and institutions
accountable for results. Agenda 2063 will not happen spontaneously, it will
require conscious and deliberate efforts to nurture a transformative leadership
that will drive the agenda and defend Africa’s interests.
4. We rededicate ourselves to the enduring Pan African vision of “an integrated,
prosperous and peaceful Africa, driven by its own citizens and representing
a dynamic force in the international arena.”
AFRICAN ASPIRATIONS FOR 2063
5. Our united voices paint a picture of what we desire for ourselves, for future
generations and the continent.
6. The aspirations reflect our desire for shared prosperity and well-being, for unity
and integration, for a continent of free citizens and expanded horizons, where
the full potential of women and youth, boys and girls are realized, and with
freedom from fear, disease and want.
AGENDA 2063 The Africa We Want
2
7. Africa is self-confident in its identity, heritage, culture and shared values and
as a strong, united and influential partner on the global stage making its
contribution to peace, human progress, peaceful co-existence and welfare. In
short, a different and better Africa.
8. We are confident that Africa has the capability to realise her full potential in
development, culture and peace and to establish flourishing, inclusive and
prosperous societies. We thus, commit to act together towards achieving the
following aspirations:
ASPIRATION 1. A prosperous Africa based on inclusive growth and
sustainable development
9. We are determined to eradicate poverty in one generation and build shared
prosperity through social and economic transformation of the continent.
10. We aspire that by 2063, Africa shall be a prosperous continent, with the means
and resources to drive its own development, with sustainable and long-term
stewardship of its resources and where:
• African people have a high standard of living, and quality of life, sound
health and well-being;
• Well educated and skilled citizens, underpinned by science, technology
and innovation for a knowledge society is the norm and no child misses
school due to poverty or any form of discrimination;
• Cities and other settlements are hubs of cultural and economic activities,
OUR ASPIRATIONS FOR THE AFRICA WE WANT
1. A prosperous Africa based on inclusive growth and sustainable development
2. An integrated continent, politically united and based on the ideals of
Pan-Africanism and the vision of Africa’s Renaissance
3. An Africa of good governance, democracy, respect for human rights, justice
and the rule of law
4. A peaceful and secure Africa
5. An Africa with a strong cultural identity, common heritage, shared values
and ethics
6. An Africa whose development is people-driven, relying on the potential of
African people, especially its women and youth, and caring for children
7. Africa as a strong, united and influential global player and partner
3
with modernized infrastructure, and people have access to affordable
and decent housing including housing finance together with all the basic
necessities of life such as, water, sanitation, energy, public transport and
ICT;
• Economies are structurally transformed to create shared growth, decent
jobs and economic opportunities for all;
• Modern agriculture for increased production, productivity and value
addition contributes to farmer and national prosperity and Africa’s collective
food security; and
• Africa’s unique natural endowments, its environment and ecosystems,
including its wildlife and wild lands are healthy, valued and protected, with
climate resilient economies and communities.
11. By 2063, African countries will be amongst the best performers in global quality
of life measures. This will be attained through strategies of inclusive growth,
job creation, increasing agricultural production; investments in science,
technology, research and innovation; gender equality, youth empowerment
and the provision of basic services including health, nutrition, education,
shelter, water and sanitation.
12. Africa’s collective GDP will be proportionate to her share of the world’s
population and natural resource endowments.
13. Africa’s agriculture will be modern and productive, using science, technology,
innovation and indigenous knowledge. The hand hoe will be banished by
2025 and the sector will be modern, profitable and attractive to the continent’s
youths and women.
14. Africa’s human capital will be fully developed as its most precious resource,
through sustained investments based on universal early childhood development
and basic education, and sustained investments in higher education, science,
technology, research and innovation, and the elimination of gender disparities
at all levels of education. Access to post-graduate education will be expanded
and strengthened to ensure world-class infrastructure for learning and
research and support scientific reforms that underpin the transformation of the
continent.
15. Africa’s Blue/ocean economy, which is three times the size of its landmass,
shall be a major contributor to continental transformation and growth, through
knowledge on marine and aquatic biotechnology, the growth of an Africa-wide
shipping industry, the development of sea, river and lake transport and fishing;
and exploitation and beneficiation of deep sea mineral and other resources.
16. Whilst Africa at present contributes less than 5% of global carbon emissions,
AGENDA 2063 The Africa We Want
4
it bears the brunt of the impact of climate change. Africa shall address the
global challenge of climate change by prioritizing adaptation in all our actions,
drawing upon skills of diverse disciplines with adequate support (affordable
technology development and transfer, capacity building, financial and
technical resources) to ensure implementation of actions for the survival of
the most vulnerable populations, including islands states, and for sustainable
development and shared prosperity.
17. Africa will participate in global efforts for climate change mitigation that
support and broaden the policy space for sustainable development on the
continent. Africa shall continue to speak with one voice and unity of purpose
in advancing its position and interests on climate change.
18. Africa shall have equitable and sustainable use and management of water
resources for socio-economic development, regional cooperation and the
environment.
ASPIRATION 2. An integrated continent, politically united, based on
the ideals of Pan-Africanism and the vision of Africa’s Renaissance
19. Since 1963, the quest for African Unity has been inspired by the spirit of Pan
Africanism, focusing on liberation, and political and economic independence.
It is motivated by development based on self-reliance and self-determination
of African people, with democratic and people-centred governance.
20. We aspire that by 2063, Africa shall:
• Be a United Africa;
• Have world class, integrative infrastructure that criss-crosses the continent;
• Have dynamic and mutually beneficial links with her Diaspora; and
• Be a continent of seamless borders, and management of cross-border
resources through dialogue.
21. Africa shall be an integrated, united, peaceful, sovereign, independent,
confident and self-reliant continent.
22. Africa will witness the rekindling of solidarity and unity of purpose that
underpinned the struggle for emancipation from slavery, colonialism,
apartheid and economic subjugation. By 2020 all remnants of colonialism
will have ended and all African territories under occupation fully liberated.
We shall take measures to expeditiously end the unlawful occupation of the
Chagos Archipelago, the Comorian Island of Mayotte and affirm the right to
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara. All kinds of oppression
5
including gender, racial and other forms of discrimination will be ended.
23. The political unity of Africa will be the culmination of the integration process,
which includes the free movement of people and the establishment of
continental institutions, leading to full economic integration. By 2030, there
shall be consensus on the form of the continental government and institutions.
24. Africa shall be a continent where the free movement of people, capital, goods
and services will result in significant increases in trade and investments amongst
African countries rising to unprecedented levels, and in the strengthening of
Africa’s place in global trade.
25. By 2063, the necessary infrastructure will be in place to support Africa’s
accelerated integration and growth, technological transformation, trade and
development. This will include high-speed railway networks, roads, shipping
lines, sea and air transport, as well as well-developed ICT and the digital
economy. A Pan-African High Speed Train Network will connect all the major
cities/capitals of the continent, with adjacent highways and pipelines for gas,
oil, water, as well as ICT Broadband cables and other infrastructure. This will
be a catalyst for manufacturing, skills development, technology, research and
development, integration and intra-African trade, investments and tourism.
26. The world-class infrastructure, accompanied by trade facilitation, will see intra-
African trade growing from less than 12% in 2013 to approaching 50% by 2045.
Africa’s share of global trade shall rise from 2% to 12%. This will in turn spur the
growth of Pan-African companies of global reach in all sectors.
ASPIRATION 3. An Africa of good governance, democracy, respect for
human rights, justice and the rule of law
27. Africa shall have a universal culture of good governance, democratic values,
gender equality, respect for human rights, justice and the rule of law.
28. We aspire that by 2063, Africa will:
• Be a continent where democratic values, culture, practices, universal
principles of human rights, gender equality, justice and the rule of law are
entrenched; and
• Have capable institutions and transformative leadership in place at all
levels.
29. The continent’s population will enjoy affordable and timely access to
independent courts and judiciary that deliver justice without fear or favour.
AGENDA 2063 The Africa We Want
6
Corruption and impunity will be a thing of the past.
30. Africa will be a continent where the institutions are at the service of its
people. Citizens will actively participate in the social, economic and political
development and management. Competent, professional, rules and meritbased
public institutions will serve the continent and deliver effective and
efficient services. Institutions at all levels of government will be developmental,
democratic, and accountable.
31. There will be transformative leadership in all fields (political, economic,
religious, cultural, academic, youth and women) and at continental, regional,
national and local levels.
ASPIRATION 4. A peaceful and secure Africa
32. Mechanisms for peaceful prevention and resolution of conflicts will be
functional at all levels. As a first step, dialogue-centred conflict prevention and
resolution will be actively promoted in such a way that by 2020 all guns will be
silent. A culture of peace and tolerance shall be nurtured in Africa’s children
and youth through peace education.
33. Africa will be a peaceful and secure continent, with harmony among
communities starting at grassroots level. The management of our diversity will
be a source of wealth, harmony and social and economic transformation rather
than a source of conflict.
34. We aspire that by 2063, Africa shall have:
• An entrenched and flourishing culture of human rights, democracy,
gender equality, inclusion and peace;
• Prosperity, security and safety for all citizens; and
• Mechanisms to promote and defend the continent’s collective security
and interests.
35. We recognize that a prosperous, integrated and united Africa, based on good
governance, democracy, social inclusion and respect for human rights, justice
and the rule of law are the necessary pre-conditions for a peaceful and conflictfree
continent.
36. The continent will witness improved human security with sharp reductions in
violent crimes. There shall be safe and peaceful spaces for individuals, families
and communities.
7
37. Africa shall be free from armed conflict, terrorism, extremism, intolerance and
gender-based violence, which are major threats to human security, peace and
development. The continent will be drugs-free, with no human trafficking,
where organized crime and other forms of criminal networks, such as the arms
trade and piracy, are ended. Africa shall have ended the illicit trade in and
proliferation of small arms and light weapons.
38. Africa shall promote human and moral values based on inclusion and the
rejection of all forms of terrorism, religious extremism and other forms of
intolerance, irrespective of their motivations.
39. By 2063, Africa will have the capacity to secure peace and protect its citizens
and their interests, through common defence, foreign and security policies.
ASPIRATION 5: An Africa with a strong cultural identity, common
heritage, values and ethics
40. Pan-Africanism and the common history, destiny, identity, heritage, respect for
religious diversity and consciousness of African people’s and her diaspora’s will
be entrenched.
41. We aspire that by 2063:
• Pan Africanism will be fully entrenched;
• The African Renaissance has reached its peak; and
• Our diversity in culture, heritage, languages and religion shall be a cause
of strength, including the tangible and intangible heritage of Africa’s
island states.
42. Pan-African ideals will be fully embedded in all school curricula and Pan-African
cultural assets (heritage, folklore, languages, film, music, theatre, literature,
festivals, religions and spirituality.) will be enhanced. The African creative
arts and industries will be celebrated throughout the continent, as well as, in
the diaspora and contribute significantly to self-awareness, well-being and
prosperity, and to world culture and heritage. African languages will be the
basis for administration and integration. African values of family, community,
hard work, merit, mutual respect and social cohesion will be firmly entrenched.
43. Africa’s stolen culture, heritage and artefacts will be fully repatriated and
safeguarded.
AGENDA 2063 The Africa We Want
8
44. Culture, heritage and a common identity and destiny will be the centre of
all our strategies so as to facilitate a Pan-African approach and the African
Renaissance.
45. Africa’s women and youth shall play an important role as drivers of change.
Inter-generational dialogue will ensure that Africa is a continent that adapts to
social and cultural change.
46. Africa is a continent of people with religious and spiritual beliefs, which play a
profound role in the construction of the African identity and social interaction.
The continent will continue to vehemently oppose all forms of politicization of
religion and religious extremism.
ASPIRATION 6: An Africa whose development is people-driven,
relying on the potential of African people, especially its women and
youth, and caring for children
47. All the citizens of Africa will be actively involved in decision making in all
aspects. Africa shall be an inclusive continent where no child, woman or man
will be left behind or excluded, on the basis of gender, political affiliation,
religion, ethnic affiliation, locality, age or other factors.
48. All the citizens of Africa will be actively involved in decision making in all aspects
of development, including social, economic, political and environmental.
49. We aspire that by 2063, Africa:
• Is People-centred and caring;
• Puts children first;
• Has empowered women to play their rightful role in all spheres of life;
• Has full gender equality in all spheres of life; and
• Has engaged and empowered youth.
50. The African woman will be fully empowered in all spheres, with equal social,
political and economic rights, including the rights to own and inherit property,
sign contracts, register and manage businesses. Rural women will have access
to productive assets: land, credit, inputs and financial services.
51. All forms of gender-based violence and discrimination (social, economic,
9
political) against women and girls will be eliminated and the latter will fully
enjoy all their human rights. All harmful social practices (especially female
genital mutilation and child marriages) will be ended and barriers to quality
health and education for women and girls eliminated.
52. Africa of 2063 will have full gender parity, with women occupying at least 50%
of elected public offices at all levels and half of managerial positions in the
public and the private sectors. The economic and political glass ceiling that
restricted women’s progress will have been shattered.
53. African children shall be empowered through the full implementation of the
African Charter on the Rights of the Child.
54. The youth of Africa shall be socially, economically and politically empowered
through the full implementation of the African Youth Charter.
55. Africa will be a continent where the talent of the child and the youth will be fully
developed, rewarded and protected for the benefit of society.
56. All forms of systemic inequalities, exploitation, marginalization and
discrimination of young people will be eliminated and youth issues
mainstreamed in all development agendas.
57. Youth unemployment will be eliminated, and Africa’s youth guaranteed full
access to education, training, skills and technology, health services, jobs and
economic opportunities, recreational and cultural activities as well as financial
means and all necessary resources to allow them to realize their full potential.
58. Young African men and women will be the path breakers of the African knowledge
society and will contribute significantly to innovation and entrepreneurship.
The creativity, energy and innovation of Africa’s youth shall be the driving force
behind the continent’s political, social, cultural and economic transformation.
ASPIRATION 7: Africa as a strong, united and influential global player
and partner
59. Africa shall be a strong, united, resilient, peaceful and influential global player and
partner with a significant role in world affairs. We affirm the importance of African
unity and solidarity in the face of continued external interference including, attempts
to divide the continent and undue pressures and sanctions on some countries.
AGENDA 2063 The Africa We Want
10
60. We aspire that by 2063, Africa shall be:
• A major social, political and economic force in the world, with her rightful
share of the global commons (land, oceans and space);
• An active and equal participant in global affairs, multilateral institutions,
and a driver for peaceful co-existence, tolerance and a sustainable and just
world; and
• Fully capable and have the means to finance her development.
61. Africa will take her rightful place in the political, security, economic, and social
systems of global governance towards the realization of its Renaissance,
establishing Africa as a leading continent. We undertake to continue the
global struggle against all forms of exploitation, racism and discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerances; to advance international cooperation
that promotes and defends Africa’s interests, and is mutually beneficial and
aligned to our Pan-Africanist vision; to continue to speak with one voice
and act collectively to promote our common interests and positions in the
international arena.
62. Africa shall continue to advocate for the reform of the United Nations and other
international institutions, with particular reference to the UN Security Council,
in order to correct the historical injustice of Africa not being represented on
the Council by a permanent seat.
63. Africa is on an upward trend and seeks mutually beneficial relations and
partnerships with other regions and continents. It, therefore, looks at the nature
of partnerships with a view to rationalizing them and enhancing the benefits
to its transformation and integration efforts. We shall do so by strengthening
our common perspectives on partnerships and by speaking with one voice on
priorities and views on global matters.
11
THE ASSEMBLY OF THE AFRICAN UNION
64. We, the Heads of State and Government of the African Union assembled for
the 24th Ordinary Session of the Assembly of the Union in January 2015, Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia;
65. Have taken note of the aspirations and determination of the African people
expressed above, reiterate our full appreciation and commitment to these
aspirations;
66. Re-affirm that Agenda 2063 builds on past achievements and challenges and
takes into account the continental and global context and trends in which
Africa is realizing its transformation, including:
a. The Pan African vision and project, which guided struggles of African
people and their descendants against slavery, colonialism, apartheid and
racial discrimination; the commitment of the founders of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) to self-determination, integration, solidarity and unity; and
which today forms the backdrop for Africa’s renaissance, transformation and
integration.
b. An African turning point, starting at the turn of the millennium with our
renewed determination to end wars and conflicts, to build shared prosperity,
to integrate, to build responsive and democratic governance and to end the
continent’s marginalization through the transformation of the OAU into the
African Union and the adoption of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
(NEPAD). Thus Africa, over the last decade has experienced sustained levels
of growth, greater peace and stability and positive movements on a number
of human development indicators. We recognise that sustaining this path and
pace, though positive, is not sufficient for Africa to catch up, hence the need
for radical transformation at all levels and in all spheres. Africa must therefore,
consolidate the positive turn around, using the opportunities of demographics,
natural resources, urbanization, technology and trade as a springboard to
ensure its transformation and renaissance to meet the people’s aspirations.
c. Lessons from global developmental experiences, the significant advances by
countries of the South to lift huge sections of their populations out of poverty,
improve incomes and catalyse economic and social transformation. We are
part of the global drive through the United Nations and other multilateral
organisations to find multi-lateral approaches to humanity’s most pressing
concerns including human security and peace, the eradication of poverty,
AGENDA 2063 The Africa We Want
12
hunger and disease, gender equality and climate change, as well as the
Common African Position on the post-2015 Development Agenda.
d. Learning from past and present African development efforts and challenges
and forging an African-centred approach to transformation which includes
lessons from post-independence state and nation-building, industrialization
and modernization efforts, the fight against disease, ignorance and poverty;
and the push for integration, as captured in the OAU Charter, the Monrovia
Declaration, the Lagos Plan of Action, the Abuja Treaty, the AU Constitutive
Act and, NEPAD.
e. People-centered development, gender equality and youth empowerment,
which place the African people at the centre of all continental efforts, to
ensure their participation in the transformation of the continent, and to
build caring and inclusive societies. No society can reach its full potential,
unless it empowers women and youth and removes all obstacles to women’s
full participation in all areas of human endeavours. Africa must provide an
enabling environment for its women, children and young people to flourish
and reach their full potential.
f. The changing global context, and in our times the modern information
revolution; globalization; changes in technology, production, trade, knowledge
and labour markets; the opportunities presented by global demographic
trends, urbanization and the growing global middle and working classes in the
South; the move towards multi-polarity with strong elements of uni-polarism
remaining, global security and the impact of climate change. Humanity today
has the capacities, technology and know-how to ensure a decent standard
of living and human security for all inhabitants of our earth. And yet children
continue to die of preventable diseases; women continue to die whilst giving
birth; hunger and malnutrition remain part of the human experience; and
underdevelopment, fragility, marginalization and inequality between regions
and countries and within countries persist.
67. Stress that Agenda 2063 is:
• Our endogenous plan for transformation. It harnesses the continent’s
comparative advantages such as its people, history and cultures; its natural
resources; its position and repositioning in the world to effect equitable and
people-centred social, economic and technological transformation and the
eradication of poverty. It seeks to fulfil our obligation to our children as an
inter-generational compact, to develop Africa’s human capital; build social
13
assets, infrastructure and public goods; empower women and youth;
promote lasting peace and security; build effective developmental
states and participatory and accountable institutions of governance.
• Africa’s vision and roadmap for sequencing our sectoral and normative,
national, regional and continental plans into a coherent whole.
• A call to action to all Africans and people of African descent, to take
personal responsibility for the destiny of the continent and as the
primary agents of change and transformation.
• A commitment from citizens, leadership, governments and institutions
at national, regional and continental levels to act, coordinate, and
cooperate for the realization of this vision.
68. Note that Agenda 2063 builds on the pledges made through the 50th
Anniversary Solemn Declaration.
69. We are confident that our peoples’ aspirations and the dream of an
Africa that is integrated, peaceful and prosperous is achievable, provided
that we construct this future-based plan on actions taken now.
AGENDA 2063 The Africa We Want
14
A CALL TO ACTION
70. We are deeply conscious that Africa in 2015 stands at a crossroads and we are
determined to transform the continent and ensure irreversible and universal
change of the African condition.
71. We recognize that, although Island States face problems similar to other
African countries, they nevertheless have their own peculiar characteristics,
vulnerabilities and strengths, which have been taken into account in Agenda
2063.
72. We hereby adopt Agenda 2063, as a collective vision and roadmap for the
next fifty years and therefore commit to speed-up actions to:
a. Eradicate poverty in the coming decades, through enhanced investment in
the productive capacities (skills and assets) of our people, improving incomes,
creating jobs and providing basic necessities of life.
b. Provide opportunities for all Africans to have decent and affordable housing
in clean, secure and well planned environments by:
• Providing access to affordable and decent housing to all in sustainable
human settlements;
• Ensuring effective and territorial planning and land tenure, use and
management systems;
• Ensuring balanced development of all human settlements while embracing
a rural urban continuum; and
• Improving the livelihoods of the great percentage of the people working
and living in slums and informal settlements.
c. Catalyse education and skills revolution and actively promote science,
technology, research and innovation, to build knowledge, human capital,
capabilities and skills to drive innovations and for the African century:
• Expand universal access to quality early childhood, primary and secondary
education;
• Expand and consolidate gender parity in education;
• Strengthen technical and vocational education and training through
scaled up investments, establishment of a pool of high-quality TVET
centres across Africa, foster greater links with industry and alignment to
labour markets, with a view to improve the skills profile, employability and
15
entrepreneurship of especially youth and women, and closing the skills
gap across the continent;
• Build and expand an African knowledge society through transformation
and investments in universities, science, technology, research and
innovation; and through the harmonization of education standards and
mutual recognition of academic and professional qualifications;
• Establish an African Accreditation Agency to develop and monitor
educational quality standards, with a view to expanding student and
academic mobility across the continent;
• Strengthen the Pan African University, build the Pan African Virtual
University, and elevate Africa’s role in global research, technology
development and transfer, innovation and knowledge production; and
• Harness universities and their networks and other options to enable high
quality university education.
d. Transform, grow and industrialise our economies through beneficiation and
value addition of natural resources:
• Implementing the African Industrial Development Action Plan, the African
Mining Vision at country, regional and continental level, in particular fasttracking
the establishment of the Centre for African Mineral Development;
• Implementing joint cross-border investments to exploit shared natural
resources;
• Promoting social dialogue, sectoral and productivity plans and regional
and commodity value chains to support the implementation of industrial
policies at all levels, with focus on SMMEs and Agribusinesses;
• Establishing Commodity Exchanges for strategic African products;
• Developing strategies to grow the African Blue/ocean and green
economies;
• Developing the African private sector through engagement and a
conducive climate, fostering Pan-African businesses through the growth
of regional manufacturing hubs and scaled up intra-Africa trade;
• Enhancing the Productivity Agenda for Africa, as an essential engine for
industrialization, progressively enhancing the competitiveness of the
continent in the global economy; and
• Promoting macro-economic policies that facilitate growth, employment
creation, investments and industrialisation.
e. Consolidate the modernisation of African agriculture and agro-businesses,
through scaled up value addition and productivity, and by 2063:
AGENDA 2063 The Africa We Want
16
• Completely eliminate hunger and food insecurity;
• Reduce the imports of food and raise intra-Africa trade in agriculture and
food to 50% of total formal food and agricultural trade;
• Expand the introduction of modern agricultural systems, technology,
practices and training, including the banishment of the hand-hoe;
• Develop and implement affirmative policies and advocacy to ensure
women’s increased access to land and inputs, and ensure that at least 30%
of agricultural financing are accessed by women; and
• Economically empower women and youth by enhancing access to financial
resources for investment.
f. Act with a sense of urgency on climate change and the environment,
implementation of the Programme on Climate Action in Africa, including:
• Identification of five regional technology centres, linking with national
designated climate technology entities;
• Programmes on climate change targeting women and youth;
• A climate resilient agricultural development programme such as CAADP;
• Sustainable forest management programmes;
• National adaptation plans, systems and structures (National Designated
Authorities and Implementation Entities); and
• Sustainable exploitation and management of Africa’s diversity for the
benefit of its people.
g. Connect Africa through world-class Infrastructure, including interconnectivity
between island states and the mainland, and with a concerted push to finance
and implement the major infrastructure projects in:
• Transport: connecting all African capitals and commercial centres through
the Africa Integrated High Speed Train Network, the PIDA transport
corridors; improving the efficiency and connections of the African aviation
sector and implementing the Yamoussoukro Declaration, and strengthening
the African port and shipping sector as regional and continental assets.
• Energy: harnessing all African energy resources to ensure modern,
efficient, reliable, cost-effective, renewable and environmentally friendly
energy to all African households, businesses, industries and institutions,
through building the national and regional energy pools and grids, and
PIDA energy projects.
• ICT: a continent on equal footing with the rest of the world as an information
society, an integrated e-economy where every government, business and
citizen has access to reliable and affordable ICT services by increasing
17
broadband penetration by 10% by 2018, broadband connectivity by 20
percentage points and providing access to ICT to children in schools and
venture capital to young ICT entrepreneurs and innovators and migration
to digital TV broadcasting by 2016.
h. Fast-track the establishment of the Continental Free Trade Area by 2017, a
programme to double intra-Africa trade by 2022, strengthen Africa’s common
voice and policy space in global trade negotiations and establish the financial
institutions within agreed upon timeframes.
i. Support young people as drivers of Africa’s renaissance, through investment in
their health, education and access to technology, opportunities and capital, and
concerted strategies to combat youth unemployment and underemployment.
Ensure faster movement on the harmonization of continental admissions,
curricula, standards, programmes and qualifications and raising the standards
of higher education to enhance the mobility of African youth and talent across
the continent.
j. Silence the guns by 2020, through enhanced dialogue-centred conflict
prevention and resolution, to make peace a reality for all our people. We
pledge not to bequeath the burden of conflicts to the next generation of
Africans by ending all wars in Africa by 2020. We shall establish an African
Human Security Index (AHSI) to monitor progress.
k. Achieve gender parity in public and private institutions, and the removal
of all forms of gender discrimination in the social, cultural, economic and
political spheres. Mobilise a concerted drive towards immediately ending child
marriages, female genital mutilation and other harmful cultural practises that
discriminate against women and girls.
l. Introduce an African Passport, issued by Member States, capitalising on
the global migration towards e-passports, and with the abolishment of visa
requirements for all African citizens in all African countries by 2018.
m. Consolidate a democratic and people-centered Africa, through the universal
application of the normative framework of the African Governance Architecture,
and all elections on the continent are free, fair and credible.
n. Enhance Africa’s united voice in global negotiations, through pooled
sovereignty, integration and the development of common African positions.
Increase Africa’s visibility in global arena, and correct the historical injustice
AGENDA 2063 The Africa We Want
18
of Africa as the region without a permanent seat in the UN Security Council
within the next decade.
o. Strengthen domestic resource mobilisation, build continental capital markets
and financial institutions, and reverse the illicit flows of capital from the
continent, in order to:
• Build effective, transparent and harmonised tax and revenue collection
systems and public expenditure;
• Reduce aid dependency;
• Enhance domestic savings;
• Eliminate all forms of illicit flows;
• Double the contribution of African capital markets in development
financing;
• Render fully operational appropriate continental financial mechanisms/
institutions;
• Elevate Africa- multilateral lending institutions to global status;
• Reduce unsustainable levels of debts;
• Address the particular challenges of island states in continental and global
development financial regimes;
• Create an enabling global environment for Africa’s development,
including the mobilisation of resources from all funding mechanisms for
implementation of Africa’s priorities as defined in Agenda 2063; and
• Take measures to ensure technology transfer, adaptation and support for
innovation.
p. Set up an implementation, monitoring, evaluation system, underpinned by
accountability and transparency, to ensure the attainment of the Agenda
2063 Aspirations by:
• Identifying leadership and stakeholders at the national, regional and
continental levels and assigning roles and responsibilities to each of them;
• Providing broad policy guidelines that would be adopted/adapted
by national, regional and continental stakeholders with respect to the
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of Agenda 2063;
• Conducting an institutional review of AU structures, processes and methods
of work in relation to the implementation of Agenda 2063;
• Leveraging the strengths of the RECs as the focal points for coordinating
the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of Agenda 2063 at member
states’ level;
• Leveraging the strengths of AU institutions, such as African Union
Commission (AUC), NEPAD Planning and Coordinating Agency (NPCA),
19
the Pan-African Parliament (PAP), Economic, Social and Cultural Council
(ECOSOCC), STCs amongst others, to coordinate implementation,
monitoring and evaluation at the continental level;
• Leveraging the strengths of collaborators and other strategic partners, such
as the African Development Bank (AfDB), the UN Economic Commission
for Africa (UNECA), the African Capacity Building Foundation (ACBF), the
Association of African Public Services Commissions (AAPSC) amongst
others to assist the AU institutions in playing their roles effectively; and
• Organising an annual stakeholder platform to review the progress of
implementation of Agenda 2063 at the national, regional and continental
levels and submitting the outcome of these deliberations in the form of
Annual Agenda 2063 State of the Union Report to the Assembly of the
African Union.
73. We are resolutely moving towards continental unity: the speeding up of the
regional integration process is a critical success factor for shared prosperity
and peace. Political unity of Africa will be the culmination of the integration
process, including the free movement of people, the establishment of the
continental institutions, and full economic integration. By 2030, there shall be
consensus on the form of the continental government and institutions.
CRITICAL ENABLERS FOR AFRICA’S TRANSFORMATION
74. The determination, participation, self-reliance and solidarity of Africa’s peoples
and leadership are preconditions for success and we therefore recognize the
following as critical enablers of continental transformation:
a. The People’s ownership and mobilisation: The continuous mobilisation of the
African people and the diaspora in various formations, effective communication
and outreach, and sustained and inclusive social dialogue on Agenda 2063.
b. African resources to finance its development: Looking inwards to mobilise
African resources to finance and accelerate its transformation, integration,
peace, security, infrastructure, industrialization, democratic governance and
strengthen continental institutions.
c. Accountable leadership and responsive institutions: Build visionary and
accountable leadership, democratic and developmental governance and
institutions, through robust and transparent planning, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation mechanisms at all levels.
AGENDA 2063 The Africa We Want
20
d. Capable and democratic developmental states and institutions: Revitalise
African development planning capacities and rebuild career, professional and
capable public services. Strengthen and transform regional and continental
institutions and the manner in which we do business, so as to effectively lead
and drive the agenda for transformation and integration.
e. Changed attitudes and mind-sets, to rekindle and strengthen Pan-African
values of self-reliance, solidarity, hard work and collective prosperity, and build
on African successes, experiences and best practices to forge the African
model of development and transformation.
f. A Pan-African perspective, through solidarity, integration, implementation of
our programmes and pooled sovereignty on critical issues of continental and
global dimensions.
g. Ownership of the African narrative and brand to ensure that it reflects
continental realities, aspirations and priorities and Africa’s position in the world.
h. African approach to development and transformation, learning from the
diverse, unique and shared experiences and best practices of various countries
and regions as a basis of forging an African approach to transformation.
75. We reaffirm our pledge in the 50th Anniversary Solemn Declaration to
immediately align and integrate Agenda 2063 in our national and regional
development plans and ensure that we provide the AU Commission and
other regional and continental institutions with the necessary capacities and
resources to effectively drive the implementation of Agenda 2063.
76. We call upon the international community to respect Africa’s vision and
aspirations and to align their partnerships appropriately. In this regard, we
reaffirm the Rio principles of common, but differentiated responsibilities, the
right to development and equity, mutual accountability and responsibility and
policy space for nationally tailored policies and programmes on the continent.
Our Journey towards the Africa of 2063 has started...

Agenda 2063 is gaining momentum,
...It is time for action:
Twitter: @_AfricanUnion, #Agenda2063
Facebook: AfricanUnionCommission
Africn Union Website: www.au.int
Website: www.agenda2063.au.int
Email: agenda2063@africa-union.org
Address: African Union Commission
P O Box 3243
Roosevelt Street
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
Tel: +251 115 513 822
Fax: +251 115 519 321
Contribute to, or follow the dialogue:
Be part of the transformation!
