ACTION FOR PEACEKEEPING 
Declaration of Shared Commitments on UN Peacekeeping Operations 
1. We, Member States of the United Nations (UN), in our respective and various capacities as members of the General Assembly and the Security Council, as troop, police and financial contributors to UN peacekeeping operations, as host governments, and as members of international, regional and sub-regional organisations and arrangements, together with those organisations and arrangements, and the Secretary-General of the UN, issue this Declaration of Shared Commitments, which represents the renewal of our collective engagement with UN peacekeeping operations. 
2. Today, peacekeeping faces critical challenges, and success depends on all stakeholders playing their part in a renewed collective commitment. We support the Secretary-General’s vision for reforming the peace and security pillar of the UN Secretariat and his commitment to improving the ability of the UN to deliver on its mandates through management reform, which will enhance the impact of peacekeeping. 
3. We affirm the primacy of politics in the resolution of conflict and the supporting role of peacekeeping operations therein, and reaffirm the basic principles of peacekeeping, such as consent of the parties, impartiality, and non-use of force, except in selfdefence and defence of the mandate. We recall the importance of peacekeeping as one of the most effective tools available to the UN in the promotion and maintenance of international peace and security. We collectively reaffirm our continued and strong support for peacekeeping to play a critical role in preventing, containing and resolving conflicts where peacekeeping operations are deployed and for its role in promoting compliance with international law and building peace. 
TO ADVANCE POLITICAL SOLUTIONS TO CONFLICT AND ENHANCE THE POLITICAL IMPACT OF PEACEKEEPING
4. We collectively commit to stronger engagement to advance political solutions to conflict and to pursue complementary political objectives and integrated strategies, including at national and regional levels, within our respective mandates and responsibilities. We affirm that the pursuit of sustainable political solutions should guide the design and deployment of UN peacekeeping operations. We recognize that lasting progress in strengthening security, national reconciliation, the rule of law, human rights and sustainable development needs to occur in parallel. 
5. As Member States, we commit to pursue clear, focused, sequenced, prioritized and achievable mandates by the Security Council matched by appropriate resources; to seek measures to enable greater coherence between mandates and resources; and to support the implementation of Security Council resolutions through our bilateral and multilateral engagements. 
6. The Secretary-General commits to report to the Security Council using a comprehensive analysis with frank and realistic recommendations, to propose parameters for the sequencing and prioritization of mandates, and to enhance measures to share the findings of Secretary-General- commissioned reviews and special investigations, as appropriate. 
7. To strengthen consultation between peacekeeping stakeholders on mandates and their implementation, we collectively commit to implement existing intergovernmental commitments on triangular cooperation between uniformed personnel contributing countries, the Security Council and Secretariat, and to consider options for further direct engagement between host governments and the Security Council. 
8. We collectively commit to implement the Women, Peace and Security agenda and its priorities by ensuring full, equal and meaningful participation of women in all stages of the peace process and by systematically integrating a gender perspective into all stages of analysis, planning, implementation and reporting. We further recommit to increasing the number of civilian and uniformed women in peacekeeping at all levels and in key positions. 
STRENGTHENING THE PROTECTION PROVIDED BY PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS
9. We recognize that host states bear the primary responsibility to protect civilians and stress the contribution that peacekeeping operations, where mandated, can make to international efforts to protect civilians and to promote and protect human rights. 
10. We collectively commit to support tailored, context specific peacekeeping approaches to protecting civilians, in relevant peacekeeping operations, emphasising the protection of women and children in those contexts. We commit to implement protection of civilians mandates of peacekeeping missions, including through using all necessary means when required, in accordance with the UN Charter, mission mandates, and applicable international law. We further commit to improving strategic communications and engagement with local populations to strengthen the understanding of the peacekeeping missions and their mandates. 
TO IMPROVE THE SAFETY AND SECURITY OF PEACEKEEPERS
11. We pay tribute to fallen peacekeepers and condemn in the strongest terms all acts of violence against UN personnel, as well as any attempts to commit such acts, which may constitute war crimes. We commit to take all appropriate measures to bring to justice perpetrators of criminal acts against UN personnel. 
12. Recognizing the evolving challenges in today’s conflict environments, we collectively commit to take active and concerted measures to address the rise in peacekeeper fatalities and enhance safety and security, and in this regard, we note the importance of the Secretary- General’s Action Plan and Peacekeeping Training Plan, as well as efforts to improve continually medical, technical and logistical support in peacekeeping operations. 
TO SUPPORT EFFECTIVE PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY BY ALL PEACEKEEPING COMPONENTS
13. We collectively commit to ensuring the highest level of peacekeeping performance, and to hold all civilian and uniformed peacekeepers, particularly leadership, accountable for effective performance under common parameters while addressing performance shortfalls. The Secretary-General commits to develop an integrated performance policy framework based on clear standards for all actors, and to ensure that performance data is used to inform planning, evaluation, deployment decisions and reporting; to communicate to Member States all operational and technical requirements; to provide effective field support to peacekeeping operations, and to work with Member States to generate the necessary specialized capabilities, including language skills, while supporting new approaches to improve force generation, equipment serviceability and sustainability. 
14. As Member States, we commit to provide welltrained and well-equipped uniformed personnel and to support the effective development and delivery of peacekeeping training. We further commit to support pre-deployment preparations of personnel and capabilities required for effective performance, and the existing human rights screening policy. We collectively support a light coordination mechanism related to training and capacity building and emphasise the need for increased funding to better support training. The Secretary-General commits to provide Member States with training materials and standards which match operational requirements. 
15. We stress the importance of avoiding all caveats which have a detrimental impact on mandate implementation and performance. We as Member States commit to redouble all efforts to identify and clearly communicate any caveats or change in status of caveats, and to work with the Secretariat to develop a clear, comprehensive and transparent procedure on caveats. 
TO STRENGTHEN THE IMPACT OF PEACEKEEPING ON SUSTAINING PEACE
16. The Secretary-General commits, in sustaining peace through multidimensional peacekeeping operations, to seek to strengthen national ownership and capacity; in doing so, ensure integrated analysis and planning, particularly for transitions; and to seek greater coherence among UN system actors including through joint platforms such as the Global Focal Point on Police, Justice and Corrections.
17. We collectively commit to support inclusive and participatory approaches by peacekeeping operations with the host government. We further support the inclusion and engagement of civil society and all segments of the local population in peacekeeping mandate implementation. We further commit to strong coordination, coherence and cooperation between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission during peacekeeping mandates, as appropriate. During transitions from peacekeeping operations, we commit to support UN Country Teams to continue assisting host countries to build peace. 
TO IMPROVE PEACEKEEPING PARTNERSHIPS
18. We collectively commit to enhance collaboration and planning between the UN and relevant international, regional and sub-regional organizations and arrangements, including the African Union (AU) and the European Union (EU), which have deployed several mandated operations in the past years, while recognising the need for a clear delineation of roles between respective operations. We commit to support the AU to strengthen and implement its policies, procedures and capacities, including on compliance. Recognising the Security Council’s primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, we reaffirm the need to enhance the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of financing for AU-led peace support operations authorized by the Security Council, and under the Security Council’s authority consistent with Chapter VIII of the UN Charter. 
19. As host governments of peacekeeping operations, we commit to make all efforts to build and sustain peace and to cooperate with peacekeeping operations in the pursuit of Security Council mandates, including facilitating access, and recognise national responsibilities related to the safety and security of peacekeepers. 
20. Collectively, we commit to better prepare, train and equip uniformed personnel by pursuing innovative approaches, including triangular partnerships and co-deployments. 
TO STRENGTHEN THE CONDUCT OF PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS AND PERSONNEL 
21. We collectively commit, within our respective responsibilities, to holding personnel and leadership accountable for proper conduct, including through support to the UN zero-tolerance policy with its victimcentred approach on all forms of sexual exploitation and abuse. We commit as Member States to certifying that prospective personnel meet UN standards for service in UN peacekeeping operations. 
22. We are committed to the implementation of the UN Human Rights Due Diligence Policy for all UN support to non-UN security forces, including reimbursements. 
23. We further commit to sound environmental management by implementing the United Nations Environmental Policy for UN field missions, and to support environmentally-responsible solutions to our operations and mandate delivery. 
24. We as endorsers of this Declaration commit to translating these commitments into our positions and practices in the relevant UN bodies, including the General Assembly and the Security Council in their consideration of peacekeeping, and to meet periodically in relevant formats to review progress, including at field-level. 
