[Start1]
Agenda item 9
Adoption of the final outcome of the International Meeting



		Mauritius Declaration


	We, the representatives of the people of the world participating in the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, held at Port Louis, Mauritius, from 10 to 14 January 2005,
	1.	Reaffirm the continued validity of the Barbados Programme of Action1 as the blueprint providing the fundamental framework for the sustainable development of small island developing States;
	2.	Further reaffirm our commitment to the Principles of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development2 and underscore that the full implementation of Agenda 21,3 the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation4 and the outcomes of other relevant major United Nations conferences and summits will contribute to the sustainable development of small island developing States;
	3.	Reiterate that the acknowledged vulnerability of small island developing States continues to be of major concern and that this vulnerability will grow unless urgent steps are taken;
	4.	Reaffirm our commitment to support the efforts of small island developing States for their sustainable development through the further full and effective implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action, including through achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals;
	5.	Further reaffirm that small island developing States continue to be a special case for sustainable development;
	6.	Recognize that the tragic impacts of the Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami that occurred on 26 December 2004 and the recent hurricane season in the Caribbean and Pacific highlight the need to develop and strengthen effective disaster risk reduction, early warning systems, emergency relief, and rehabilitation and reconstruction capacities;
	7.	Welcome the declaration of the Special ASEAN Leaders Meeting held in the aftermath of the recent disaster in countries in and around the Indian Ocean, the proposed establishment of a regional natural disaster early warning system for the Indian Ocean and the South-east Asia region, and enhanced international cooperation and partnerships to build and manage effective regional early warning systems, public education and awareness, and disaster management;
	8.	Reiterate that an effective multilateral system based on international law, supported by strong international institutions with the United Nations at the centre, is fundamental for achieving international peace and security and sustainable development;
	9.	Acknowledge efforts at the regional level which address the sustainable development of small island developing States and, in this regard, pledge our support to enhance subregional, regional and interregional cooperation;
	10.	Reaffirm our commitment to support the sustainable development strategies of small island developing States through technical and financial cooperation, regional and interregional institutional assistance and an improved international enabling environment;
	11.	Recognize that good governance within each country and at the international level is essential for sustainable development;
	12.	Also recognize that particular attention should be given to building resilience in small island developing States, including through technology development, capacity-building and human resource development;
	13.	Further recognize that international trade is important for building resilience and the sustainable development of small island developing States, and therefore call upon the international institutions, including financial institutions, to pay appropriate attention to the particular needs and priorities of small island developing States;
	14.	Underscore that attention should be focused on the specific trade- and development-related needs and concerns of small island developing States to enable them to integrate fully into the multilateral trading system in accordance with the Doha mandate on small economies;
	15.	Recognize that women and youth as well as the civil society are playing a key role in promoting sustainable development activities in small island developing States, and encourage them in their efforts;
	16.	Reaffirm our commitment to create a world fit for children as called for in the outcome document adopted by the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh special session5 and, in this regard, undertake to give all assistance to protect children and minimize the impacts of natural disasters and environmental degradation on them;
	17.	Recognize the increasing incidence of health issues, particularly HIV/AIDS, which impact disproportionately on women and youth in small island developing States, and commit ourselves to ensuring that the health needs of small island developing States are comprehensively addressed in all regional and global programmes;
	18.	Have adopted the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States taking into account new and emerging issues, and commit ourselves to the timely implementation of the Strategy;
	19.	Express appreciation for the efforts of the United Nations and its specialized agencies in helping to advance the sustainable development of small island developing States, and invite them to strengthen their support to the Strategy through enhanced coherence and coordination;
	20.	Express particular gratitude and appreciation to the Government and people of Mauritius for hosting the International Meeting and for the facilities made available to ensure its overwhelming success.

Done at Port Louis, Mauritius
14 January 2005

	1 	Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April-6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
	2 	Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 
3-14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
	3 	Ibid., annex II.
	4 	Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 
26 August-4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
	5 	General Assembly resolution S-27/2, annex.
[Start1]<<ODS JOB NO>>N0520781E<<ODS JOB NO>>
<<ODS DOC SYMBOL1>>A/CONF.207/L.6<<ODS DOC SYMBOL1>>
<<ODS DOC SYMBOL2>><<ODS DOC SYMBOL2>>
__________________

__________________

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------





2

3

United NationsA/CONF.207/L.6 


International Meeting to Review
the Implementation of the Programme
of Action for the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States

Port Louis, Mauritius
10-14 January 2005Distr.: Limited
13 January 2005

Original: English


05-20781 (E)    130105    
*0520781*

